4.4 Newton’s Second Law of Motion

Newton was the first to discover the relationship among three basic physical concepts—acceleration, force, and mass. He proposed one of the most important rules of nature, his second law of motion. Newton’s second law states:

The acceleration of an object is directly proportional to the net force acting on the object, is in the direction of the net force, and is inversely proportional to the mass of the object.

In summarized form, this is

Acceleration ∼ net force/mass

We use the wiggly line ∼ as a symbol meaning “is proportional to.” We say that acceleration a is directly proportional to the overall net force F and inversely proportional to the mass m. By this we mean that, if F increases, a increases by the same factor (if F doubles, a doubles), but if m increases, a decreases by the same factor (if m doubles, a is cut in half).

By using consistent units, such as newtons (N) for force, kilograms (kg) for mass, and meters per second squared (m/s²) for acceleration, the proportionality may be expressed as an exact equation:

Acceleration = net force/mass

In its briefest form, where a is acceleration, Fnet is net force, and m is mass, the equation becomes

a = Fnet/m

An object is accelerated in the direction of the force acting on it. Applied in the direction of the object’s motion, a force will increase the object’s speed. Applied in the opposite direction, it will decrease its speed. Applied at right angles, it will deflect the object. Any other direction of application will result in a combination of speed change and deflection. The acceleration of an object is always in the direction of the net force.

Figure 4.11
Acceleration is inversely proportional to mass.

Check Point
1. In Chapter 3, acceleration was defined as the time rate of change of velocity; that is, a = (change in v)/time. Are we in this chapter saying that acceleration is instead the ratio of force to mass; that is, a = F/m? Which is it?
2. A jumbo jet cruises at constant velocity of 1000 km/h when the thrusting force of its engines is a constant 100,000 N. What is the acceleration of the jet? What is the force of air resistance on the jet?

Check Your Answers
1. Acceleration is defined as the time rate of change of velocity and is produced by a force. How much force/mass (the cause) determines the rate change in v/time (the effect). So in this chapter we define the terms that produce acceleration.
2. The acceleration is zero because the velocity is constant. Since the acceleration is zero, it follows from Newton’s second law that the net force is zero, which means that the force of the air drag must just equal the thrusting force of 100,000 N and act in the opposite direction. So the air drag on the jet is 100,000 N. (Note that we don’t need to know the velocity of the jet. We need to know only that the velocity is constant, our clue that both acceleration and net force are zero.)

Margin note
When two things are directly proportional to each other, as one increases, the other increases also. However, when two things are inversely proportional to each other, as one increases, the other decreases.

Media notes
TUTORIAL: Newton’s Second Law
VIDEO: Newton’s Second Law
SCREENCAST: Newton’s Second Law
SCREENCAST: Nellie in an Elevator
