26.2       Electromagnetic Wave Velocity
   Our study of light begins by inves-    Unlike other moving objects, electromagnetic waves traveling through free space
   tigating its electromagnetic prop-     never change speed. Why this is so involves electromagnetic induction and energy
   erties. In Chapter 27, we’ll discuss   conservation. If light were to slow down, its changing electric field would generate
   its appearance—color. In Chapter       a weaker magnetic field, which, in turn, would generate a weaker electric field,
   28, we’ll learn how light behaves—     and so on, until the wave died out. Energy would be lost and none would be trans-
   how it reflects and refracts. Then     ported from one place to another. So light cannot travel slower than it does.
   we’ll learn about its wave nature
                                             If light were to speed up, the changing electric field would generate a stronger
   in Chapter 29 and its quantum
   nature in Chapters 30 and 31.
                                          magnetic field, which, in turn, would generate a stronger electric field, and so on,
                                          a crescendo of ever-increasing field strength and ever-increasing energy—clearly a
                                          no-no with respect to energy conservation. At only one speed does mutual induc-
                                          tion continue indefinitely, carrying energy forward without loss or gain. From his
                                          equations of electromagnetic induction, Maxwell calculated the value of this criti-
  Maxwell “with his own thinking”         cal speed and found it to be 300,000 kilometers per second. In his calculation, he
  calculated the speed of light. Some     used only the constants in his equations that were determined by simple laboratory
  100 years later, in 1969, millions of
  people watching the first Moon
                                          experiments with electric and magnetic fields. He didn’t use the speed of light. He
  landing on TV listened to conver-       found the speed of light!
  sations between the astronauts             Maxwell quickly realized that he had discovered the solution to one of the great-
  and mission control on Earth.           est mysteries of the universe—the nature of light. He discovered that light is sim-
  When viewers perceived a distinct
  time delay between the messages,
                                          ply electromagnetic radiation within a particular frequency range, 4.3 3 1014 to
  they heard the effect of Maxwell’s      7 3 1014 vibrations per second. Such waves activate the “electrical antennae” in the
  speed “with their own ears.”            retina of the eye. The lower-frequency waves appear red, and the higher-frequency
                                          waves appear violet.1 Maxwell realized, at the same time, that electromagnetic
                                          radiation of any frequency propagates at the same speed as light.
                                          1
                                           It is common to describe sound and radio waves by frequency and light by wavelength. In this book, how-
                                          ever, we favor the single concept of frequency in describing light.
                                                                                                        C H A P T E R 2 6    P r o p e r t i e s o f L i g h t   489


   Check Point
   The unvarying speed of electromagnetic waves in space is a remarkable
   consequence of what central principle in physics?                                                                     SCREENCAST: Speed of Light


   Check Your Answer
   The conservation of energy.
