28.5 Dispersion and Rainbows
We know that the average speed of light is less than c in a transparent medium; how much less depends on the nature of the medium and on the frequency of light. The speed of light in a transparent medium depends on its frequency. Recall from Chapter 26 that light with frequencies that match the natural or resonant frequencies of the electron oscillators in the atoms and molecules of the transparent medium is absorbed, and light with frequencies near the resonant frequencies is not absorbed but interacts more often than light of lower frequencies in the absorption-reemission sequence. Since the natural or resonant frequency of most transparent materials is in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum, higher-frequency light travels more slowly than lower-frequency light. Violet light travels about 1% slower in ordinary glass than red light. Light waves with colors between red and violet travel at their own intermediate speeds.

SCREENCAST: Rainbows

Because light of different frequencies travels at different speeds in transparent materials, it refracts by different amounts. When white light is refracted twice, as in a prism, the separation of the different colors of light is quite noticeable. This separation of light into colors arranged according to frequency is called dispersion (Figure 28.30). It is what enabled Isaac Newton to form a spectrum when he held a glass prism in sunlight.

Figure 28.30
Dispersion by a prism makes the components of white light visible.

A most spectacular illustration of dispersion is a rainbow. For a rainbow to be seen, the Sun must be shining in one part of the sky and water drops in a cloud or in falling rain must be present in the opposite part of the sky. When we turn our backs toward the Sun, we see the spectrum of colors in a bow. Seen from an airplane near midday, the bow forms a complete circle (with the shadow of a low-flying airplane seen in the center). All rainbows would be completely round if the ground were not in the way.

The beautiful colors of rainbows are dispersed from the sunlight by millions of tiny spherical water droplets that act like prisms. We can better understand this by considering an individual raindrop, as shown in Figure 28.31. Follow the ray of sunlight as it enters the drop near its top surface. Some of the light here is reflected (not shown), and the remainder is refracted into the water. At this first refraction, the light is dispersed into its spectrum colors, violet being deviated the most and red the least. Reaching the opposite side of the drop, each color is partly refracted out into the air (not shown) and partly reflected back into the water. Arriving at the lower surface of the drop, each color is again reflected (not shown) and refracted into the air. This second refraction is similar to that of a prism, where refraction at the second surface increases the dispersion already produced at the first surface.

Figure 28.31
Dispersion of sunlight by a single raindrop.

Two refractions and a reflection can actually result in the angle between the incoming and outgoing rays being anything between 0 degrees and about 42 degrees (0 degrees corresponds to a full 180 degrees reversal of the light). There is a strong concentration of light intensity, however, near the maximum angle of 42 degrees. That is what is shown in Figure 28.31.

Although each drop disperses a full spectrum of colors, an observer is in a position to see the concentrated light of only a single color from any one drop (Figure 28.32). If violet light from a single drop reaches the eye of an observer, red light from the same drop is incident elsewhere below the eyes. To see red light, one must look to a drop higher in the sky. The color red will be seen when the angle between a beam of sunlight and the light sent back by a drop is 42 degrees. The color violet is seen when the angle between the sunbeams and deflected light is 40 degrees.

Figure 28.32
Sunlight incident on two sample raindrops, as shown, emerges from them as dispersed light. The observer sees the red light from the upper drop and the violet light from the lower drop. Millions of drops produce the whole spectrum of visible light.

VIDEO: The Rainbow

Why does the light dispersed by the raindrops form a bow? The answer to this involves a little geometric reasoning. First of all, a rainbow is not the flat two-dimensional arc it appears to be. It appears flat for the same reason a spherical burst of fireworks high in the sky appears as a disc-because of a lack of distance cues. The rainbow you see is actually a three-dimensional cone with the tip (apex) at your eye (Figure 28.33). Consider a glass cone, the shape of those paper cones you sometimes see at drinking fountains. If you held the tip of such a glass cone against your eye, what would you see? You'd see the glass as a circle. Likewise with a rainbow. All the drops that disperse the rainbow's light toward you lie in the shape of a cone-a cone of different layers with drops that disperse red to your eye on the outside, orange beneath the red, yellow beneath the orange, and so on, all the way to violet on the inner conical surface. The thicker the region containing water drops, the thicker the conical edge you look through, and the more vivid the rainbow.

Figure 28.33
When your eye is located between the Sun (not shown off to the left) and a water drop region, the rainbow you see is the edge of a three-dimensional cone that extends through the water drop region. (Innumerable layers of drops form innumerable two-dimensional arcs like the four suggested here.)

To further understand this, consider only the deflection of red light. You see red when the angle between the incident rays of sunlight and dispersed rays is 42 degrees. Of course, beams are dispersed 42 degrees from drops all over the sky in all directions-up, down, and sideways. But the only red light you see is from drops that lie on a cone with a side-to-axis angle of 42 degrees. Your eye is at the apex of this cone, as shown in Figure 28.34. To see violet, you look 40 degrees from the conical axis (so the thickness of glass in the cone of the preceding paragraph is tapered-very thin at the tip and thicker with increased distance from the tip). Your cone of vision that intersects the cloud of drops that creates your rainbow is different from that of a person next to you. So when a friend says, "Look at the pretty rainbow," you can reply, "Okay, move aside so I can see it too." Everybody sees his or her own personal rainbow.

Figure 28.34
Only raindrops along the dashed line disperse red light to the observer at a 42 degree angle; hence, the light forms a bow.

Another fact about rainbows: A rainbow always faces you squarely because of the lack of distance cues mentioned earlier. When you move, your rainbow moves with you. So you can never approach the side of a rainbow, or see it nearly end-on as in the exaggerated view of Figure 28.33. You can't get to its end. Therefore the expression "looking for the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow" means pursuing something you can never reach.

Often a larger secondary bow with colors reversed can be seen arching at a larger angle around the primary bow. We won't treat this secondary bow except to say that it is formed by similar circumstances and is a result of double reflection within the raindrops (Figure 28.36). Because of this extra reflection (and extra refraction loss), the secondary bow is much dimmer and its colors are reversed.

Figure 28.35
Two refractions and a reflection in water droplets produce light at all angles up to about 42 degrees, with the intensity concentrated where we see the rainbow at 40 degrees to 42 degrees. No light emerges from the water droplet at angles larger than 42 degrees unless it undergoes two or more reflections inside the drop. So the sky is brighter inside the rainbow than outside it. Notice the weak secondary rainbow to the right of the primary.

Figure 28.36
Double reflection in a drop produces a secondary bow.

Check Point
1. If you point to a wall with your arm extended to make about a 42 degree angle to the normal to the wall and then rotate your arm in a full circle while keeping the same angle, what shape does your arm describe? What shape on the wall does your finger sweep out?
2. If light traveled at the same speed in raindrops as it does in air, would we still have rainbows?

Check Your Answers
1. Your arm describes a cone, and your finger sweeps out a circle-likewise with rainbows.
2. No.
