Chapter 6 Momentum

Derek Muller found his way into physics teaching through his three passions: understanding the world, helping others, and making films. In his childhood, he was obsessed with practical applications of natural phenomena. Instead of playing with toys, he planted gardens with edible plants, farmed silk worms for their precious cocoons, and learned to make pottery to use when eating his crops. He was intrigued with science, which seemed like magic to him.

Derek’s earliest inspiration for teaching came from his two older sisters, who taught him skills and an appreciation for careful teaching. Later, throughout middle school and high school, he took on the role of a teacher, passing on his science knowledge to friends and peers. In tutoring he experienced the satisfaction of teaching a concept well and cherishing the feeling of being useful. His path then led him to physics education.

After earning his undergraduate degree in Engineering Physics at Queens University in Kingston, Canada, Derek moved to Australia, where he earned a Ph.D. in Physics Education Research at the University of Sydney. As part of his doctoral research he studied the effectiveness of online science videos. He found, to his surprise, that most novice students learned no physics whatsoever from video lessons on physics (as a disclaimer, my Conceptual Physics videos were not part of his study). Derek identified what he saw as the root cause of the problem—student misconceptions of elementary physics. And he found that the problem went well beyond physics. Combating science misunderstandings by the general public became Derek’s calling.

To surmount common misunderstandings and to clear a path for learning, Derek created a channel on YouTube called Veritasium. On this channel he posts science videos, particularly on physics, in which he engages the general public in spirited discussions. In the videos Derek points out inconsistencies with the goal of eliciting “aha moments” of understanding. Using this approach, Derek has created over 130 videos, which have been seen more than 17 million times. Worldwide, Derek’s channel is ranked in the top 1000, with more than 300,000 subscribers (as this goes to press).

At this present time of transition in teaching methods, the physics community has a great pioneer in Derek Muller, who has truly found an effective way to bring an appreciation and understanding of physics to a global audience.

6.1 Momentum

We all know that a heavy truck is harder to stop than a small car moving at the same speed. We state this fact by saying that the truck has more momentum than the car. And if two cars have the same mass, the faster one is harder to stop than the slower one. So we also say that the faster-moving car has more momentum than the slower one. By momentum we mean inertia in motion. More specifically, momentum is defined as the product of the mass of an object and its velocity:

Momentum = mass × velocity

Or, in shorthand notation,

Momentum = mv

When direction is not an important factor, we can say

Momentum = mass × speed

which we still abbreviate mv.

We can see from the definition that a moving object can have a large momentum if either its mass or its velocity is large or if both its mass and its velocity are large. The truck has more momentum than the car moving at the same speed because the truck has a greater mass. We can see that a huge ship moving at a low speed can have a large momentum, as can a small bullet moving at a high speed.

Figure 6.1 The boulder, unfortunately, has more momentum than the runner.

Figure 6.2 Why are the engines of a container ship normally cut off 25 km from port? Timing is especially important when changing momentum.

And, of course, a huge object moving at a high speed, such as a massive truck rolling down a steep hill with no brakes, has a huge momentum, whereas the same truck at rest has no momentum at all—because the v term in mv is zero.

TUTORIAL: Momentum
VIDEO: Definition of Momentum
