Chapter 26 Properties of Light

26.1 Electromagnetic Waves
26.2 Electromagnetic Wave Velocity
26.3 The Electromagnetic Spectrum
26.4 Transparent Materials
26.5 Opaque Materials
26.6 Seeing Light—The Eye

1 Looking down from the space station MIR at a solar eclipse on Earth. 2 Bob and Leslie Abrams (my daughter) assist Dave Wall with an optics experiment. 3 Spots of light on the wall, on the ground, and on lab manual author Dean Baird are pinhole images of the Sun cast through small openings between leaves on nearby trees. 4 During a partial solar eclipse (when the Moon covers part of the Sun in the sky), the solar images are crescents. 5 During an annular eclipse, the Moon aligns with but doesn’t fully cover the Sun, resulting in rarely seen solar circles, as demonstrated by Paul Doherty during the 2012 annular eclipse that passed over the western United States.

James Clerk Maxwell, born in 1831, was a Scottish mathematician and theoretical physicist. His parents did not meet and marry until they were well into their thirties, which was unusual at that time, and his mother was nearly 40 when James was born. James was the only surviving child, his older sister dying in infancy.

Maxwell had an unquenchable curiosity from an early age. His mother recognized his potential and took responsibility for his early education, which in the Victorian era was largely the job of the woman of the house. Unfortunately, she died of abdominal cancer when Maxwell was only 8. His education was then overseen by his father, who hired a 16-year-old tutor for young Maxwell. The tutor treated him harshly, chiding him for being slow and wayward. After his father dismissed the tutor, Maxwell was sent to the prestigious Edinburgh Academy.

Ten-year-old Maxwell, raised in isolation on his father’s countryside estate, didn’t fit in well at school. With no space in the first-year class, he was obliged to join the second-year class with classmates a year older. His mannerisms and Galloway accent struck the other boys as rustic, and arriving on his first day at school wearing home-made shoes and tunic earned him the unkind nickname of “Dafty.” Maxwell, however, never seemed to have resented the epithet, bearing it without complaint for many years.

At an early age, Maxwell was fascinated by geometry. His academic work remained unremarkable until, at the age of 13, he won the school’s mathematical medal and first prizes for English and poetry. At age 14, Maxwell wrote a paper describing a mechanical means of drawing mathematical curves with a piece of twine and the properties of curves with two or more foci. His genius showed in this work on “oval curves,” which was presented to the Royal Society of Edinburgh, but not by Maxwell. Since he was deemed too young, he entrusted the paper to a professor of natural philosophy at Edinburgh University.

Maxwell left Edinburgh Academy at the age of 16 and began attending classes at the University of Edinburgh. He had the opportunity to attend Cambridge after his first term but decided instead to complete the full course of his undergraduate studies at the local university.

Maxwell soon found his classes undemanding, and he immersed himself in private study during his free time at the university and particularly during visits back home. There he experimented with improvised chemical and electromagnetic apparatus. His chief preoccupation at the time was polarized light. He constructed shaped blocks of gelatin, subjecting them to various stresses, and with a pair of polarizing prisms viewed the resulting colored fringes in the gelatin. Maxwell had discovered photoelasticity, a means of determining the stress distribution within physical structures.

At age 18, Maxwell contributed two papers to the Royal Society of Edinburgh. Although the work was impressive, as with his schoolboy paper on oval curves, he was considered too young to stand at the rostrum and make the presentation himself. Maxwell’s papers were instead delivered by his tutor.

In October 1850, already an accomplished mathematician, Maxwell left Scotland for Cambridge University and soon joined Trinity College, where in 1854 he graduated with a degree in mathematics. Maxwell decided to remain at Trinity after graduating and, aside from tutoring and examining duties, to pursue scientific interests such as color, hydrostatics, optics, and Saturn’s rings at his own leisure.

In 1859, after moving to Marischal College in Aberdeen, Scotland, Maxwell married Katherine Mary Dewar, the daughter of the college’s principal. In that same year, he won a prize for concluding that the rings of Saturn consist of small particles—a conclusion verified more than a century later in the space age. Maxwell had a near-fatal bout of smallpox soon thereafter and headed south to London with his wife. He took a position at King’s College, which turned out to be the most productive period of his career. There he displayed the world’s first colored photograph and developed ideas on the viscosity of gases. His most significant achievement, however, was the development of electromagnetic theory, synthesizing all previous unrelated observations, experiments, and equations of electricity, magnetism, and even optics into one consistent theory. Around 1862, he calculated that the speed of propagation of an electromagnetic field is approximately the speed of light. He wrote, “We can scarcely avoid the conclusion that light consists in the transverse undulations of the same medium which is the cause of electric and magnetic phenomena.”

After Newton’s work, which first unified mechanics, Maxwell’s work in electromagnetism has been called the “second great unification in physics.” Maxwell died of abdominal cancer at the age of 48.

26.1 Electromagnetic Waves

Light is the only thing we see. Sound is the only thing we hear.

Recall from Chapter 25 that Maxwell discovered that light is the oscillation of electric and magnetic fields. You know that if you shake the end of a stick back and forth in still water, you will produce waves on the surface of the water. Maxwell taught us that if you similarly shake an electrically charged rod to and fro in empty space, you will produce waves in space. The vibrating electric and magnetic fields regenerate each other to make up an electromagnetic wave, which emanates (moves outward) from the vibrating charge. There is only one speed, it turns out, for which the electric and magnetic fields remain in perfect balance, reinforcing each other as they carry energy through space. Let’s see why this is so.

Figure 26.1 Shake an electrically charged object to and fro, and you produce an electromagnetic wave.

Figure 26.2 INTERACTIVE FIGURE The electric and magnetic fields of an electromagnetic wave are perpendicular to each other and to the direction of motion of the wave.
