Section 19.5 Wave Interference

Whereas a material object such as a rock will not share its space with another rock, more than one vibration or wave can exist at the same time in the same space. If we drop two rocks in water, the waves produced by each can meet and produce wave interference. The overlapping of waves can form an interference pattern. Within the pattern, wave effects may be increased, decreased, or neutralized.

When more than one wave occupies the same space at the same time, the displacements add at every point. This is the superposition principle. So, when the crest of one wave overlaps the crest of another, their individual effects add together to produce a wave of increased amplitude. This is called constructive interference (Figure 19.10). When the crest of one wave overlaps the trough of another, their individual effects are reduced. The high part of one wave simply fills in the low part of another. This is called destructive interference.

Figure 19.10 Constructive and destructive interference in a transverse wave.

Wave interference is easiest to see in water. In Figure 19.11 we see the interference pattern made when two vibrating objects touch the surface of water. We can see the regions where a crest of one wave overlaps the trough of another to produce regions of zero amplitude. At points along these regions, the waves arrive out of step. We say they are out of phase with each other.

Figure 19.11 Two sets of overlapping water waves produce an interference pattern. The left image is an idealized drawing of the expanding waves from the two sources. The right image is a photograph of an actual interference pattern.

Interference is characteristic of all wave motion, whether the waves are water waves, sound waves, or light waves. We will treat the interference of sound in Chapter 20 and the interference of light in Chapter 29.

Standing Waves

If we tie a rope to a wall and shake the free end up and down, we produce a train of waves in the rope. The wall is too rigid to shake, so the waves are reflected back along the rope. By shaking the rope just right, we can cause the incident and reflected waves to form a standing wave, where parts of the rope, called the nodes, appear to be standing still. Nodes are the regions of minimal or zero displacement, with minimal or zero energy. Antinodes (not labeled in Figure 19.12), in contrast, are the regions of maximum displacement and maximum energy. You can hold your fingers just over and under the nodes and the rope doesn't touch them. Other parts of the rope, especially the antinodes, would make contact with your fingers. Antinodes occur halfway between nodes.

Figure 19.12 The incident and reflected waves interfere to produce a standing wave.

Standing waves are the result of interference (and, as we will see in Chapter 20, resonance). When two sets of waves of equal amplitude and wavelength pass through each other in opposite directions, the waves are steadily in and out of phase with each other. This occurs for a wave that reflects upon itself. Stable regions of constructive and destructive interference are produced.

It is easy to make standing waves yourself. Tie a rope - or, better, a rubber tube - to a firm support. Shake the tube up and down with your hand. If you shake the tube with the right frequency, you will set up a standing wave, as shown in Figure 19.13a. Shake the tube with twice the frequency, and a standing wave of half the previous wavelength, having two loops, will result (Figure 19.13b). (The distance between successive nodes is a half wavelength; two loops constitute a full wavelength.) If you triple the frequency, a standing wave with one-third the original wavelength, having three loops, will result (Figure 19.13c); and so forth.

Figure 19.13 (a) Shake the rope until you set up a standing wave of one segment (1/2 wavelength). (b) Shake with twice the frequency and produce a wave with two segments (1 wavelength). (c) Shake with three times the frequency and produce three segments (1 1/2 wavelengths).

Standing waves are set up in the strings of musical instruments when they are plucked, bowed, or struck. They are set up in the air in an organ pipe, a trumpet, or a clarinet and the air of a soda-pop bottle when air is blown over the top. Standing waves can be set up in a tub of water or in a cup of coffee by sloshing the tub or cup back and forth with the right frequency. Standing waves can be produced with either transverse or longitudinal vibrations.

An organ pipe or flute makes sound with standing waves in a column of air.

Figure 19.14 Satchmo produces standing waves of sound in his trumpet.

Check Point
1. Is it possible for one wave to cancel another wave so that no amplitude remains at certain points?
2. Suppose you set up a standing wave of three segments, as shown in Figure 19.13c. If you shake with twice as much frequency, how many wave segments will occur in your new standing wave? How many wavelengths?

Check Your Answers
1. Yes. This is called destructive interference. In a standing wave in a rope, for example, parts of the rope have no amplitude - the nodes.
2. If you impart twice the frequency to the rope, you'll produce a standing wave with twice as many segments, so you'll have six segments. Since a full wavelength has two segments, you'll have three complete wavelengths in your standing wave.
