Section 19.6 Doppler Effect
Source: Conceptual Physics PDF, textbook pages 365-366.

19.6 Doppler Effect
A pattern of water waves produced by a bug jiggling its legs and bobbing up and down in the middle of a quiet puddle is shown in Figure 19.15. The bug is not going anywhere but is merely treading water in a fixed position. The waves it makes are concentric circles because the wave speed is the same in all directions. If the bug bobs in the water at a constant frequency, the distance between wave crests (the wavelength) is the same in all directions. Waves encounter point A as frequently as they encounter point B. This means that the frequency of wave motion is the same at points A and B, or anywhere in the vicinity of the bug. This wave frequency is the same as the bobbing frequency of the bug.

Figure 19.15
Top view of water waves formed by a stationary bug jiggling in still water. The blue circles represent wavefronts in the expanding pattern.

Tutorial: Doppler Effect

Suppose the jiggling bug moves across the water at a speed lower than the wave speed. In effect, the bug chases part of the waves it has produced. The wave pattern is distorted and is no longer made of concentric circles (Figure 19.16). The center of the outer wave was made when the bug was at the center of that circle. The center of the next smaller wave was made when the bug was at the center of that circle, and so forth. The centers of the circular waves move in the direction of the swimming bug. Although the bug maintains the same bobbing frequency as before, an observer at B would see the waves coming more often. The observer would measure a higher frequency. This is because each successive wave has a shorter distance to travel and therefore arrives at B more frequently than if the bug weren’t moving toward B. An observer at A, on the other hand, would measure a lower frequency because of the longer time between wave-crest arrivals. This is because, in order to reach A, each crest has to travel farther than the one ahead of it due to the bug’s motion. This change in frequency due to the motion of the source (or receiver) is called the Doppler effect (after the Austrian scientist Christian Doppler, 1803–1853).

Figure 19.16
Water waves formed by a bug swimming in still water toward point B.

Water waves spread over the flat surface of the water. Sound and light waves, on the other hand, travel in three-dimensional space in all directions, like an expanding balloon. Just as circular waves are closer together in front of the swimming bug, spherical sound or light waves ahead of a moving source are closer together and reach a receiver more frequently.

The Doppler effect is evident when you hear the changing pitch of an ambulance siren as it passes you. When the vehicle approaches, the pitch is higher than normal (like a higher note on a musical scale). This is because the crests of the sound waves encounter your ear more frequently. And when the vehicle passes and moves away, you hear a drop in pitch because the crests of the waves hit your ear less frequently.

Video: Doppler Effect

Figure 19.17
The pitch (frequency) of sound is higher when a source is moving toward you, and lower when the source is moving away.

The Doppler effect also occurs for light. When a light source approaches, there is an increase in its measured frequency; when it recedes, there is a decrease in its frequency. An increase in frequency is called a blue shift because the increase is toward the high-frequency (or blue) end of the color spectrum. A decrease in frequency is called a red shift, referring to a shift toward the lower-frequency (or red) end of the color spectrum. Distant galaxies, for example, show a red shift in the light they emit. A measurement of this shift permits a calculation of their speeds of recession. A rapidly spinning star shows red-shifted light from the side turning away from us and blue-shifted light from the side turning toward us. This enables astronomers to calculate the star’s spin rate.

Be clear about the distinction between frequency and speed. How frequently a wave vibrates is altogether different from how fast it moves from one location to another.

Check Point
While you’re at rest, a sound source moves toward you. Do you measure the speed of its sound wave to be greater or less than if the source were stationary?

Check Your Answer
Neither! Both the frequency and the wavelength undergo a change when the source is moving, but the wave speed does not. Be clear about the distinction between frequency and speed.
