7.4 Work-Energy Theorem

When a car speeds up, its gain in kinetic energy comes from the work done on it. Or, when a moving car slows, work is done to reduce its kinetic energy. We can say:

Work = Delta KE

Work equals change in kinetic energy. This is the work-energy theorem. The work in this equation is the net work-that is, the work based on the net force.

Footnote 3: This equation can be derived as follows: If we multiply both sides of F = ma (Newton's second law) by d, we get Fd = mad. Recall from Chapter 3 that for constant acceleration from rest, d = 1/2 at^2 so we can say that Fd = ma(1/2 at^2) = (1/2)maat^2, and substituting v = at we get Fd = 1/2 mv^2. That is, Work = KE gained.

Margin note: Energy is nature's way of keeping score. Scams that sell energy-making machines rely on funding from deep pockets and shallow brains!

Figure 7.13 Due to friction, energy is transferred both into the floor and into the tire when the bicycle skids to a stop. An infrared camera reveals the heated tire track (the red streak on the floor, left) and the warmth of the tire (right). (Courtesy of Michael Vollmer)

If, for instance, you push on an object and friction also acts on the object, then the change of kinetic energy is equal to the work done by the net force, which is your push minus friction. In this case, only part of the total work that you do changes the object's kinetic energy. The rest is changed by friction into heat energy. If the force of friction is equal and opposite to your push, the net force on the object is zero and no net work is done. Then there is zero change in the object's kinetic energy. The work-energy theorem applies to decreasing speed as well. When you slam on the brakes of a car that skids, the road does work on the car. This work is the friction force multiplied by the distance over which the friction force acts.

Interestingly, the maximum friction that the road can supply to a skidding tire is nearly the same whether the car moves slowly or quickly. A car moving at twice the speed of another car takes four times (2^2 = 4) as much work to stop. Since the frictional force is nearly the same for both cars, the faster one skids four times as far before it stops. So, as accident investigators are well aware, an automobile going 100 km/h has four times the kinetic energy that it would have at 50 km/h, and the car skids four times as far with its wheels locked as it would going 50 km/h. Kinetic energy depends on speed squared. The same reasoning applies for antilock brakes (which keep tires from skidding in order to maintain the road's grip on the tires). For the not-quite-skidding tire, the maximum road friction is also nearly independent of the speed, so even with antilock brakes, it takes four times as far to stop at twice the speed.

When an automobile is braked and the tires don't skid, the brake drums convert kinetic energy to heat energy. If the tires skid, the treads and road are heated, not the brakes. Some drivers are familiar with another way to slow a vehicle-shift to low gear and allow the engine to do the braking. Today's hybrid cars do something similar; they use an electric generator to convert the kinetic energy of the slowing car to electric energy that can be stored in batteries, where it is used to complement the energy produced by gasoline combustion. (Chapter 25 describes how this is done.)

The work-energy theorem can apply to more than changes in kinetic energy. When work is done by an outside force, we can say that work = Delta E, where E stands for all kinds of energy. Work is not a form of energy but a way of transferring energy from one place to another or one form to another.

Footnote 4: The first law of thermodynamics, written Delta E = W + Q, states that the change of energy of a system is the work done on it plus the quantity of heat transferred into it.

Kinetic energy and potential energy are two among many forms of energy, and they underlie other forms of energy, such as chemical energy, nuclear energy, and the energy carried by sound and light. Kinetic energy of random molecular motion is related to temperature; potential energies of electric charges account for voltage; and kinetic and potential energies of vibrating air define sound intensity. Even light energy originates from the motion of electrons within atoms. Every form of energy can be transformed into every other form.

Screencast: Work-Energy Theorem

Check Point
1. When you are driving at 90 km/h, how much more distance do you need to stop compared with driving at 30 km/h?
2. Can an object have energy?
3. Can an object have work?

Check Your Answers
1. Nine times more. The car has 9 times as much kinetic energy when it travels 3 times as fast: 1/2 m(3v)^2 = 1/2 m9v^2 = 9(1/2 mv^2). The friction force will ordinarily be the same in either case; therefore, 9 times as much work requires 9 times as much distance.
2. Yes, but in a relative sense. For example, an elevated object may possess PE relative to the ground below but no energy relative to a point at the same elevation. Similarly, the KE that an object has is relative to a frame of reference, usually Earth's surface. (We will see that material objects have energy of being, E = mc^2, the congealed energy that makes up their mass. Read on!)
3. No. Unlike momentum or energy, work is not something that an object has. Work is energy in transit. It is the energy transferred when a force acts on an object as it moves through a distance.
