20.7 Interference
Sound waves, like any waves, can be made to exhibit interference. Recall that wave interference was discussed in Chapter 19. A comparison of interference for transverse waves and longitudinal waves is shown in Figure 20.17. In either case, when the crests of one wave overlap the crests of another wave, increased amplitude results. Or, when the crest of one wave overlaps the trough of another wave, decreased amplitude results. In the case of sound, the crest of a wave corresponds to a compression and the trough of a wave corresponds to a rarefaction. Interference occurs for all waves, both transverse and longitudinal.

SCREENCAST: Wave Interference

Figure 20.17 INTERACTIVE FIGURE Constructive (a, b) and destructive (c, d) wave interference in transverse and longitudinal waves. (a) The superposition of two identical transverse waves in phase produces a wave of increased amplitude. (b) The superposition of two identical longitudinal waves in phase produces a wave of increased intensity. (c) Two identical transverse waves that are out of phase destroy each other when they are superimposed. (d) Two identical longitudinal waves that are out of phase destroy each other when they are superimposed.

An interesting case of sound interference is illustrated in Figure 20.18. If you are an equal distance from two sound speakers that emit identical tones of fixed frequency, the sound is louder because the effects of the two speakers add. The compressions and rarefactions of the tones arrive in step, or in phase. However, if you or a speaker moves to the side so that the paths from the speakers to you differ by half a wavelength, then the rarefactions from one speaker are filled in by the compressions from the other speaker. This is destructive interference. It is just as if the crest of one water wave exactly filled in the trough of another water wave, canceling both. If the region is devoid of any reflecting surfaces, little or no sound will be heard!

Figure 20.18 INTERACTIVE FIGURE Interference of sound waves. (a) Waves arrive in phase and interfere constructively when the path lengths from the speakers are the same. (b) Waves arrive out of phase and interfere destructively when the path lengths differ by half a wavelength (or 3/2, 5/2, and so on).

If the speakers emit a whole range of sounds with different frequencies, only some waves destructively interfere for a given difference in path lengths. So interference of this type is usually not a problem, because there is usually enough reflection of sound to fill in the canceled spots. Nevertheless, “dead spots” are sometimes evident in poorly designed theaters or music halls, where sound waves reflect off walls and interfere with nonreflected waves to produce zones of low amplitude. When you move your head a few centimeters in either direction, you may hear a noticeable difference.

Sound interference is dramatically illustrated when monaural sound is played by stereo speakers that are out of phase. Speakers are out of phase when the input wires to one speaker are interchanged (positive and negative wire inputs reversed). For a monaural signal, this means that when one speaker is sending a compression of sound, the other is sending a rarefaction. The sound produced is not as full and not as loud as from speakers properly connected in phase because the longer waves are being canceled by interference. This is illustrated in Figure 20.19. Shorter waves are canceled as the speakers are brought closer together, and when the pair of speakers is brought face to face against each other, very little sound is heard! Only the sound waves that have the highest frequencies survive cancellation. You must try this to appreciate it.

Figure 20.19 If the positive and negative wire inputs to one of the stereo speakers are switched, the speakers are out of phase. When the speakers are far apart, monaural sound is not as loud as from properly phased speakers. When they are brought face to face, very little sound is heard. Interference is nearly complete as the compressions of one speaker fill in the rarefactions of the other!

Destructive sound interference is a useful property in antinoise technology. Such noisy devices as jackhammers are being equipped with microphones that send the sound of the device to electronic microchips that create mirror-image wave patterns of the sound signals. For the jackhammer, this mirror-image sound signal is fed to earphones worn by the operator. Sound compressions (or rarefactions) from the hammer are canceled by mirror-image rarefactions (or compressions) in the earphones. The combination of signals cancels the jackhammer noise. Noise-canceling earphones are already common for pilots (as worn by Ken, pictured at the beginning of this chapter). The cabins of some airplanes are now quieted with antinoise technology. When they’re not, you should wear your noise-canceling earphones.

Figure 20.20 When a mirror image of a sound signal combines with the sound itself, the sound is canceled.

Check Point
In the demonstration of Figure 20.19, why is it important that monaural sound be used?

Check Your Answer
You can cancel signals that are identical, not the different signals fed to stereo speakers. Identical signals fed to both speakers produce monaural sound—just what you need for maximum destructive interference when you switch the phases of monaural signals.
