24.1 Magnetism

Youngsters are fascinated with magnets, largely because they act at a distance. They act at a distance even when your hand is between them, as Fred Myers shows in the first chapter-opening photo. Likewise, a neurosurgeon can guide a pellet through brain tissue to inoperable tumors, pull a catheter into position, or implant electrodes while doing little harm to brain tissue. The use of magnets grows daily.

VIDEO: Oersted's Discovery

The term magnetism comes from the name Magnesia, a coastal district of ancient Thessaly in Greece, where unusual stones were found by the Greeks more than 2000 years ago. These stones, called lodestones, had the intriguing property of attracting pieces of iron. Magnets were first fashioned into compasses and used for navigation by the Chinese in the 12th century.

In the 16th century, William Gilbert, Queen Elizabeth's physician, made artificial magnets by rubbing pieces of iron against lodestone, and he suggested that a compass always points north and south because Earth has magnetic properties. Later, in 1750, John Michell, an English physicist and astronomer, found that magnetic forces decrease with distance from magnetic sources, and his results were confirmed by Charles Coulomb. The subjects of magnetism and electricity developed almost independently of each other until 1820, when a Danish physicist named Hans Christian Oersted discovered, in a classroom demonstration, that an electric current affects a magnetic compass.1 He also saw confirming evidence that magnetism was related to electricity. Shortly thereafter, the French physicist Andre Marie Ampere proposed that electric currents are the source of all magnetic phenomena.

There's much bunk about magnetism--hence the need for a knowledge filter to tell the difference between what's true and what's not. The best knowledge filter ever invented is science.

1 We can only speculate about how often such relationships become evident when they "aren't supposed to" and are dismissed as "something wrong with the apparatus." Oersted, however, had the insight--characteristic of a good scientist--to see that nature was revealing another of its secrets.

In Chapter 22, we discussed the forces that electrically charged particles exert on one another: The force between any two charged particles depends on the magnitude of the charge on each and their distance of separation, as specified in Coulomb's law. But Coulomb's law is not the whole story when the charged particles are moving with respect to each other. The force between electrically charged particles depends also, in a complicated way, on their motion. We find that, in addition to electric force, there is a force due to the motion of the charged particles that we call magnetic force. The source of magnetic force is the motion of charged particles, usually electrons. Both electrical and magnetic forces are actually different aspects of the same phenomenon of electromagnetism.

Check Point
Do both electrical forces and magnetic forces depend on motion?

Check Your Answer
Only the magnetic force requires motion. Read on.
