24.4 Magnetic Domains

The magnetic field of an individual iron atom is so strong that interactions among adjacent atoms cause large clusters of them to line up with one another. These clusters of aligned atoms are called magnetic domains. Each domain is made up of billions of aligned atoms. The domains are microscopic (Figure 24.5), and there are many of them in a crystal of iron. Like the alignment of iron atoms within domains, domains themselves can align with one another.

Figure 24.5
A microscopic view of magnetic domains in a crystal of iron. The blue arrows pointing in different directions tell us that these domains are not aligned.

Not every piece of iron, however, is a magnet. This is because the domains in ordinary iron are not aligned. Consider a common iron nail: The domains in the nail are randomly oriented. Many of them are induced into alignment, however, when a magnet is brought nearby. (It is interesting to listen with an amplified stethoscope to the clickity-clack of domains undergoing alignment in a piece of iron when a strong magnet approaches.) The domains align themselves much as electric charges in a piece of paper align themselves in the presence of an electrically charged rod. When you move the nail away from the magnet, ordinary thermal motion causes most or all of the domains in the nail to return to a random arrangement. If the field of the permanent magnet is very strong, however, the nail may retain some permanent magnetism of its own after the two are separated.

Figure 24.6
Wai Tsan Lee shows iron nails that have become induced magnets.

Cows often swallow metal objects that can puncture their stomachs. That's why farmers feed cow magnets (long, narrow alnico magnets) to cows, which attract metal pieces and lower the chance of stomach puncture.

Permanent magnets are made by simply placing pieces of iron or certain iron alloys in strong magnetic fields. Alloys of iron differ; soft iron is easier to magnetize than steel. It helps to tap the iron to nudge any stubborn domains into alignment. Another way of making a permanent magnet is to stroke a piece of iron with a magnet. The stroking motion aligns the domains in the iron. If a permanent magnet is dropped or heated, some of the domains are jostled out of alignment and the magnet becomes weaker.

Figure 24.7
INTERACTIVE FIGURE
Pieces of iron in successive stages of magnetization. The arrows represent domains; the head is a north pole and the tail is a south pole. Poles of neighboring domains neutralize each other's effects, except at the two ends of a piece of iron.

Check Point
How can a magnet attract a piece of iron that is not magnetized?

Check Your Answer
Domains in the unmagnetized piece of iron are induced into alignment by the magnetic field of the nearby magnet. See the similarity of this to Figure 22.13 in Chapter 22. Like the pieces of paper that jump to the comb, pieces of iron will jump to a strong magnet when it is brought nearby. But, unlike the pieces of paper, they are not then repelled. Can you think of the reason why?

A magstripe on a credit card contains millions of tiny magnetic domains held together by a resin binder. Data are encoded in binary code, with zeros and ones distinguished by the frequency of domain reversals. It's quite amazing how quickly your name pops up when a clerk swipes your card.
