20.6 Resonance
When the frequency of forced vibrations on an object matches the object’s natural frequency, a dramatic increase in amplitude occurs. This phenomenon is called resonance. Literally, resonance means “resounding,” or “sounding again.” Putty doesn’t resonate because it isn’t elastic, and a dropped handkerchief is too limp. In order for something to resonate, it needs a force to pull it back to its starting position and enough energy to keep it vibrating.

SCREENCAST: Resonance of Sound

A common experience illustrating resonance occurs on a child’s swing. When pumping a swing, we pump in rhythm with the natural frequency of the swing. More important than the force with which we pump is the timing. Even small pumps or small pushes from someone else, if delivered in rhythm with the natural frequency of the swinging motion, produce large amplitudes. A common classroom demonstration of resonance is to adjust a pair of tuning forks to the same frequency and space them a meter or so apart. When one of the forks is struck, it sets the other fork into vibration (Figure 20.13). This is a small-scale version of pushing a friend on a swing—it’s the timing that’s important. When a series of sound waves impinge on the fork, each compression gives the prong of the fork a tiny push. Since the frequency of these pushes corresponds to the natural frequency of the fork, the pushes successively increase the amplitude of vibration. This is because the pushes occur at the appropriate time and occur repeatedly in the same direction as the instantaneous motion of the fork. The motion of the second fork is often called a sympathetic vibration.

If the forks are not adjusted for matched frequencies, then the timing of pushes is off, and resonance will not occur. When you tune a radio, you are similarly adjusting the natural frequency of the electronics to match one of the many surrounding signals. The set then resonates to one station at a time instead of playing all stations at once.

Figure 20.13 When Ryan Patterson strikes one of the matched-frequency tuning forks, the other is set into resonance.
video: Resonance

Figure 20.14 Stages of resonance (blue arrows indicate sound waves traveling to the right). (a) The first compression meets the tuning fork and gives it a tiny and momentary push. (b) The fork bends and then (c) returns to its initial position just at the time a rarefaction arrives and (d) overshoots in the opposite direction. Just when the fork returns to its initial position (e), the next compression arrives to repeat the cycle. Now the fork bends farther because it is moving.

Resonance occurs whenever successive impulses are applied to a vibrating object in rhythm with its natural frequency. Cavalry troops marching across a footbridge near Manchester, England, in 1831 inadvertently caused the bridge to collapse when they marched in rhythm with the bridge’s natural frequency. Since then, it is customary to order troops to “break step” when crossing bridges in order to prevent resonance. A century later another major bridge disaster was caused by wind-generated resonance (Figure 20.15).

video: Resonance and Bridges

Figure 20.15 In 1940, four months after being completed, the Tacoma Narrows Bridge in Washington State was destroyed by wind-generated resonance. A mild gale produced an irregular force in resonance with the natural frequency of the bridge, steadily increasing the amplitude of vibration until the bridge collapsed.

The effects of resonance are all around us. Resonance underscores not only the sound of music but also the color of autumn leaves, the height of ocean tides, the operation of lasers, and a vast multitude of phenomena that add to the beauty of the world.

Figure 20.16 INTERACTIVE FIGURE Manuel finds that he produces a large amplitude when he pumps in rhythm with the swing’s natural frequency.
