--- PDF page 119 / textbook page 360 ---
360     PA R T F O U R    SOUND




                                            CHECK POINT
                                            1. An electric toothbrush completes 90 cycles every second. What are (a) its
                                               frequency and (b) its period?
                                            2. Gusts of wind make the Willis Tower in Chicago sway back and forth,
                                               completing a cycle in 10 s. What are (a) its frequency and (b) its
                                               period?


                                            CHECK YOUR ANSWERS
                                            1. (a) 90 cycles per second is 90 Hz; (b) 1/90 s.
                                            2. (a) 1/10 Hz; (b) 10 s.




                                           19.3     Wave Motion
                                          Most information about our surroundings arrives in some form of waves. It is
                                          through wave motion that sounds are transported to our ears, light to our eyes, and
                                          electromagnetic signals to our radios and wireless phones. Through wave motion,
                                          energy can be transferred from a source to a receiver without the transfer of matter
  Numerous fans at a concert or sta-
  dium “do the wave” by rising from
                                          between the two points.
  their seats, swinging their arms           Wave motion can be most easily understood by first considering the simple
  high, and then sitting back down        case of a horizontally stretched rope. If one end of such a rope is shaken up and
  in their seats—all in an appropri-      down, a rhythmic disturbance travels along the rope. Each particle of the rope
  ate sequence.
                                          moves up and down, while, at the same time, the disturbance moves along the
                                          length of the rope. The medium, rope or whatever, returns to its initial condi-
                                          tion after the disturbance has passed. What is propagated is the disturbance, the
                                          energy of wave motion, not the medium itself.
                                                            Perhaps a more familiar example of wave motion is a water wave. If
                                                        a stone is dropped into a quiet pond, waves travel outward in expand-
                                                        ing circles, the centers of which are at the source of the disturbance.
                                                        In this case, we might think that water is being transported with the
                                                        waves, since water is splashed onto previously dry ground when the
                                                        waves meet the shore. We should realize, however, that, barring obsta-
                                                        cles, the water will flow back into the pond and things will be much
                                                        as they were in the beginning. The surface of the water will have been
                                                        disturbed, but the water itself will have gone nowhere. A leaf on the
                                                        surface will bob up and down, and drift to and fro, as the waves pass,
                                                        but the leaf will end up where it started. Again, the medium returns
                                                        to its initial condition after the disturbance has passed—even in the
FIGURE 19.4
                                                        extreme case of a tsunami.
Water waves.
                                             Let us consider another example of a wave to illustrate that what is transported
                                          from one location to another is a disturbance in a medium, not the medium itself.
                                          If you view a field of tall grass from an elevated position on a gusty day, you will
                                          see waves travel across the grass. The individual stems of grass do not leave their
                                          places; instead, they swing to and fro. Furthermore, if you stand in a narrow foot-
  Mechanical waves require a medium.
  A Slinky needs its coils; ocean waves
                                          path, the grass that blows over the edge of the path, brushing against your legs, is
  need water; sound from a bugle          very much like the water that doused the shore in our earlier example. While wave
  needs air; “doing the wave” in a        motion continues, the tall grass swings back and forth, vibrating between definite
  stadium needs exuberant fans.           limits but going nowhere. When the wave motion stops, the grass returns to its
                                          initial position.

--- PDF page 120 / textbook page 361 ---
C H A P T E R 19    V i b r at i o n s a n d Wav e s   361


    Practicing Physics


    H
            ere we have a sine curve that represents a transverse wave.
            With a ruler, measure the wavelength and amplitude of
            the wave.

      Wavelength

      Amplitude




Transverse Waves
Fasten one end of a rope to a wall and hold the free end in your hand. If you
suddenly shake the free end up and then down, a pulse will travel along the
rope and back (Figure 19.5). In this case, the motion of the rope (up and
down arrows) is at right angles to the direction of the wave speed. The right-              SCREENCAST: Types of Waves
angled, or sideways, motion is called transverse motion. Now shake the rope
with a regular, continuing up-and-down motion, and the series of pulses will
produce a wave. Because the motion of the medium (the rope, in this case)
is transverse to the direction the wave travels, this type of wave is called a
transverse wave.

                                                                                        Figure 19.5
                                                                                        A transverse wave.




   Waves in the stretched strings of musical instruments are transverse. We will
see later that electromagnetic waves, which make up radio waves and light, are                  video: Longitudinal vs.
                                                                                                   Transverse Waves
also transverse.

Longitudinal Waves
Not all waves are transverse. Sometimes the parts that make up a medium move               Sound requires a medium. It can’t
to and fro in the same direction in which the wave travels. Motion is along the            travel in a vacuum because there’s
                                                                                           nothing to compress and stretch.
direction of the wave rather than at right angles to it. This produces a longitu-
dinal wave.
   Both a transverse wave and a longitudinal wave can be demonstrated with
a spring or a Slinky stretched out, as shown in Figure 19.6. A transverse wave


                                                                                        Figure 19.6
           (a)                                                                            INTERACTIVE FIGURE

                                               Wavelength                               Both waves transfer energy from left
                                                                                        to right. (a) When the end of a Slinky
                                                                                        is pushed and pulled rapidly along
          (b)                                                                           its length, a longitudinal wave is pro-
                                                                                        duced. (b) When it’s shaken sideways,
                                                                                        a transverse wave is produced.

--- PDF page 121 / textbook page 362 ---
362       PA R T F O U R       SOUND


              Earthquake site                is produced by shaking the end of a Slinky from side to side in a direction
                                             perpendicular to the Slinky. A longitudinal wave is created by rapidly pulling
          P                                  and pushing the end of the Slinky toward and away from you in a direction
                                S            parallel to the Slinky. In this case, we see that the medium vibrates parallel to
                         S
                                             the direction of energy transfer. Part of the Slinky is compressed, and a wave
    P
                                 S           of compression travels along the spring. In between successive compressions is a
 Mantle                  Solid inner core    stretched region, called a rarefaction. Both compressions and rarefactions travel
      P                                      in the same direction along the Slinky. Sound waves are longitudinal waves.
                         Liquid outer core      Waves that have been generated by earthquakes and that travel in the ground
              P
                     P                       are of two main types: longitudinal P waves and transverse S waves. (Geology stu-
                                             dents often remember P waves as faster “push–pull” waves, and S waves as slower
FIGURE 19.7                                  “side-to-side” waves.) S waves cannot travel through liquid matter, but P waves can
P and S waves generated by an                travel through both molten and solid parts of Earth’s interior. Study of these waves
earthquake.                                  reveals much about Earth’s interior.
                                                The wavelength of a longitudinal wave is the distance between successive com-
                                             pressions or, equivalently, the distance between successive rarefactions. The most
                                             common example of longitudinal waves is sound in air. Elements of air vibrate to
                                             and fro about some equilibrium position as the waves move by. We will treat sound
   Waves on the surface of water are         waves in detail in Chapter 20.
   a transverse longitudinal hybrid:
   Water moves in loops, up and
   down as well as to and fro. And
   as with other waves, the medium
   makes no net progress in the
                                               19.4     Wave Speed
   direction of wave propagation.            The speed of periodic wave motion is related to the frequency and wavelength
                                             of the waves. We can understand this by considering a top view of the simple
                                             case of water waves (Figure 19.8). Imagine that we fix our eyes on a stationary
                                             point on the surface of water and observe the waves passing by this point. We can
                  Wavelength                 measure how much time passes between the arrival of one crest and the arrival
                                             of the next one (the period) and also observe the distance between crests (the
                                             wavelength). We know that speed is defined as distance divided by time. In this
                                             case, the distance is one wavelength and the time is one period, so wave speed
                                             5 wavelength/period.
                                                For example, if the wavelength is 1.5 m and the time between crests at a point
                                             on the surface is 0.5 s, then the wave moves 1.5 m in 0.5 s and its speed is 1.5 m
                                             divided by 0.5 s, or 3 m/s.
                                                Since period is the inverse of frequency, the formula wave speed 5 wavelength/
                                             period can also be written as
FIGURE 19.8
A top view of water waves. Each                                     Wave speed 5 frequency 3 wavelength
blue circle represents a crest of the
expanding ripple pattern. We call            This relationship holds true for all kinds of waves, whether they are water waves,
these crest lines wavefronts.                sound waves, or light waves.




                                                                                 v = 1 m/s             1m


                                             FIGURE 19.9
                                              INTERACTIVE FIGURE

                                             If the wavelength is 1 m, and one wavelength per second passes the pole, then the speed of
                                             the wave is 1 m/s.