24.7 Magnetic Forces

On Moving Charged Particles

A charged particle at rest will not interact with a static magnetic field. But if the charged particle is moving in a magnetic field, the magnetic character of a charge in motion becomes evident. It experiences a deflecting force.6 The force is greatest when the particle moves in a direction perpendicular to the magnetic field lines. At other angles, the force is less, and it becomes zero when the particles move parallel to the field lines. In any case, the direction of the force is always perpendicular to the magnetic field lines and to the velocity of the charged particle (Figure 24.13). So a moving charged particle is deflected when it crosses through a magnetic field, but when it travels parallel to the field, no deflection occurs.

Figure 24.13
A beam of electrons is deflected by a magnetic field.

This deflecting force is very different from the forces that occur in other interactions, such as the gravitational forces between masses, the electrical forces between charges, and the magnetic forces between magnetic poles. The force that acts on a moving charged particle does not act along the line that joins the sources of interaction but, instead, acts perpendicularly to both the magnetic field and the electron beam.

We are fortunate that charged particles are deflected by magnetic fields. Charged particles in cosmic rays are deflected by Earth’s magnetic field. Although Earth’s atmosphere absorbs most of these, cosmic-ray intensity at Earth’s surface would be much greater without Earth’s protective magnetic field.

Figure 24.14
The magnetic field of Earth deflects many charged particles that make up cosmic radiation.

On Current-Carrying Wires

Simple logic tells you that if a charged particle moving through a magnetic field experiences a deflecting force, then a current of charged particles moving through a magnetic field also experiences a deflecting force. If the particles are trapped inside a wire when they respond to the deflecting force, the wire will also be pushed (Figure 24.15).

Figure 24.15
INTERACTIVE FIGURE
A current-carrying wire experiences a force in a magnetic field. (Can you see that this is a follow-up of what happens in Figure 24.13?)

6 When particles with electric charge q and velocity v move perpendicularly through a magnetic field of strength B, the force F on each particle is simply the product of the three variables: F = qvB. For nonperpendicular angles, v in this relationship must be the component of velocity perpendicular to B.

If we reverse the direction of the current, the deflecting force acts in the opposite direction. The force is strongest when the current is perpendicular to the magnetic field lines. The direction of force is not along the magnetic field lines or along the direction of current. The force is perpendicular to both field lines and current. It is a sideways force.

In the Problem Solving supplement, you’ll learn the “simple” right-hand rule!

We see that, just as a current-carrying wire will deflect a magnet such as a compass needle (again, as discovered by Oersted), a magnet will deflect a current-carrying wire. Discovering these complementary links between electricity and magnetism created much excitement, and people began harnessing the electromagnetic force for useful purposes almost immediately—with great sensitivity in electric meters and with great force in electric motors.

Check Point
What law of physics tells you that if a current-carrying wire produces a force on a magnet, then a magnet must produce a force on a current-carrying wire?

Check Your Answer
Newton’s third law, which applies to all forces in nature.

VIDEO: Magnetic Forces on Current-Carrying Wires

Electric Meters

The simplest meter to detect electric current is a magnet that is free to turn—a compass. The next simplest meter is a compass in a coil of wires (Figure 24.16). When an electric current passes through the coil, each loop produces its own effect on the needle, so a very small current can be detected. A sensitive current-indicating instrument is called a galvanometer, named after Luigi Galvani, who in the 18th century discovered that dissimilar metals caused twitching in a frog’s leg that he was dissecting.

Galvani’s chance discovery of the twitching frog led him to invent the chemical cell and the battery. The next time you pick up a galvanized pail, think of Luigi Galvani in his anatomy laboratory.

Figure 24.16
A very simple galvanometer.

A common galvanometer design is shown in Figure 24.17. It employs many loops of wire and is therefore very sensitive. The coil is mounted for movement, and the magnet is held stationary. The coil turns against a spring, so the greater the current in its windings, the greater its deflection. A galvanometer may be calibrated to measure current (amperes), in which case it is called an ammeter. Or it may be calibrated to measure electric potential (volts), in which case it is called a voltmeter.

Figure 24.17
A common galvanometer design.

Figure 24.18
Both the ammeter and the voltmeter are basically galvanometers. (The electrical resistance of the instrument is made to be very low for the ammeter and very high for the voltmeter.)

Electric Motors

If we modify the design of the galvanometer slightly, so that deflection makes a complete rather than a partial rotation, we have an electric motor. The principal difference is that in a motor, the current is made to change direction every time the coil makes a half-rotation. After being forced to turn one half-rotation, the coil continues in motion just in time for the current to reverse, whereupon, instead of the coil reversing direction, it is forced to continue another half-rotation in the same direction. This happens in cyclic fashion to produce continuous rotation, which has been harnessed to run clocks, operate gadgets, and lift heavy loads.

Figure 24.19
INTERACTIVE FIGURE
A simplified electric motor.

In Figure 24.19, we can see the principle of the electric motor in bare outline. A permanent magnet produces a magnetic field in a region in which a rectangular loop of wire is mounted to turn about the dashed axis shown. The current in the loop flips direction with each half-turn, and continuous rotation results.

Any current in the loop moves in one direction in the upper side of the loop and in the opposite direction in the lower side (because charges that flow into one end of the loop must flow out the other end). If the upper side of the loop is forced to the left by the magnetic field, the lower side is forced to the right, as if it were a galvanometer. But, unlike the situation in a galvanometer, the current in a motor is reversed during each half-revolution by means of stationary contacts on the shaft. The parts of the wire that rotate and brush against these contacts are called brushes. In this way, the current in the loop alternates so that the forces on the upper and lower regions do not change directions as the loop rotates. The rotation is continuous as long as current is supplied.

A motor and a generator are actually the same device, with input and output reversed. The electrical device in a hybrid car is such a motor/generator combination.

We have described here only a very simple dc motor. Larger motors, dc or ac, are usually manufactured by replacing the permanent magnet with an electromagnet that is energized by the power source. Of course, more than a single loop is used. Many loops of wire are wound about an iron cylinder, called an armature, which then rotates when the wire carries current.

The advent of electric motors brought to an end much human and animal toil in many parts of the world. Electric motors have greatly changed the way people live.

Check Point
What is the major similarity between a galvanometer and a simple electric motor? What is the major difference?

Check Your Answers
In both, coils are positioned in a magnetic field. A force produces rotation when current passes through the coils. The major difference is that the maximum rotation of the coil in a galvanometer is one half-turn, whereas, in a motor, the coil (wrapped on an armature) rotates through many complete turns—accomplished by alternating the current with each half-turn of the armature.
