Chapter 26: Properties of Light
Section 26.3: The Electromagnetic Spectrum

In a vacuum, all electromagnetic waves move at the same speed and differ from one another in their frequency. The classification of electromagnetic waves according to frequency is the electromagnetic spectrum (Figure 26.3). Electromagnetic waves have been detected with a frequency as low as 0.01 hertz (Hz). Electromagnetic waves with frequencies of several thousand hertz (kHz) are classified as very low frequency radio waves.

Figure 26.3 INTERACTIVE FIGURE
The electromagnetic spectrum is a continuous range of waves extending from radio waves to gamma rays. The descriptive names of the sections are merely a historical classification because all waves are the same in nature, differing principally in frequency and wavelength; all travel at the same speed.

One million hertz (MHz) lies in the middle of the AM radio band. The very high frequency (VHF) television band of waves starts at about 50 MHz, and FM radio waves are between 88 MHz and 108 MHz. Cell phones operate on either 800 MHz or 1900 MHz. Then come ultrahigh frequencies (UHF), followed by microwaves, beyond which are infrared waves, often called “heat waves.” Farther still is visible light, which makes up less than one-millionth of 1% of the measured electromagnetic spectrum. The lowest frequency of light visible to our eyes appears red. The highest frequencies of visible light, which are nearly twice the frequency of red light, appear violet. Still higher frequencies are ultraviolet. These higher-frequency waves cause sunburns. Higher frequencies beyond ultraviolet are in the X-ray and gamma-ray regions. There are no sharp boundaries between the regions, which actually overlap each other. The spectrum is divided into these arbitrary regions for classification.

Figure 26.4
(a) Bruce Novak created this teaching aid to show his students how colors of the spectrum blend from one to the other. (b) He photographed this spectrum, which better shows the blending of colors.

The concepts and relationships we treated earlier in our study of wave motion (see Chapter 19) apply here. Recall that the frequency of a wave is the same as the frequency of the vibrating source that creates the wave. Likewise, the frequency of an electromagnetic wave as it vibrates through space is identical to the frequency of the oscillating electric charge that generates it. Different frequencies correspond to different wavelengths—waves of low frequencies have long wavelengths, and waves of high frequencies have short wavelengths. For example, since the speed of the wave is 300,000 km/s, an electric charge oscillating once per second (1 Hz) will produce a wave with a wavelength of 300,000 km. This is because only one wavelength is generated in 1 second. If the frequency of oscillation were 10 Hz, then 10 wavelengths would be formed in 1 second, and the corresponding wavelength would be 30,000 km. A frequency of 10,000 Hz would produce a wavelength of 30 km. So, the higher the frequency of the vibrating charge, the shorter the wavelength of radiant energy.

Figure 26.5 INTERACTIVE FIGURE
Relative wavelengths of red, green, and violet light. Violet light has nearly twice the frequency of red light and half the wavelength.

We tend to think of space as empty, but only because we cannot see the montages of electromagnetic waves that permeate every part of our surroundings. We see some of these waves, of course, as light. These waves constitute only a microportion of the electromagnetic spectrum. We are unconscious of radio and cell-phone waves, which engulf us every moment. Free electrons in every piece of metal on Earth’s surface continuously dance to the rhythms of these waves. They jiggle in unison with the electrons being driven up and down along their transmitting antennae. A radio or television receiver is simply a device that sorts and amplifies these tiny currents. There is radiation everywhere. Our first impression of the universe is one of matter and void, but actually the universe is a dense sea of radiation occupied only occasionally by specks of matter.

Footnote 2: This is a rule of classical physics, valid when charges are oscillating over dimensions that are large compared with the size of a single atom (for instance, in a radio antenna). Quantum physics permits exceptions. Radiation emitted by a single atom or molecule can differ in frequency from the frequency of the oscillating charge within the atom or molecule.

Footnote 3: The relationship is c = fλ, where c is the wave speed (constant), f is the frequency, and λ is the wavelength.

Check Point
Are we correct to say that a radio wave is a low-frequency light wave? And that a radio wave is also a sound wave?

Check Your Answers
Yes and no. Both a radio wave and a light wave are electromagnetic waves emitted by vibrating electrons; radio waves have lower frequencies than light waves, so a radio wave may be considered to be a low-frequency light wave (and a light wave, similarly, may be considered to be a high-frequency radio wave). But a sound wave is a mechanical vibration of matter and is fundamentally different from an electromagnetic wave. So a radio wave is definitely not a sound wave.

Fractal Antennas
For quality reception of electromagnetic waves, a conventional antenna has to be about one-quarter wavelength long. That’s why, in early mobile devices, antennas had to be pulled out before the device was used. Nathan Cohen, a professor at Boston University, was troubled by a rule in Boston at the time that prohibited the use of large external antennas on buildings. So he fashioned a small antenna by folding aluminum foil into a compact fractal shape (a Van Koch figure—check fractals on the Internet). It worked. He then engineered and patented many practical fractal antennas, as did Carles Puente, an inventor in Spain. Both formed fractal-antenna companies.

Fractals are fascinating shapes that can be split into parts, each of which is (or approximates) a reduced copy of the whole. In any fractal, similar shapes appear at all levels of magnification. Common fractals in nature include snowflakes, clouds, lightning bolts, shorelines, and even cauliflower and broccoli.

The fractal antenna, like other fractals, has a shape that repeats itself. Because of its folded self-similar design, a fractal antenna can be compressed and fit into the body of the device—it can also simultaneously operate at different frequencies. Hence the same antenna can be used for mobile-phone conversations and for GPS navigation.

How nice that these devices fit in your pocket. Cheers for compact fractal antennas!
