Chapter 23, Section 23.1 - Flow of Charge and Electric Current
Source PDF used: ~CP_Curriculum_Sections(3).pdf
Textbook pages used: 431-432.

23.1 Flow of Charge and Electric Current
From our study of heat and temperature, we know that when the ends of a conducting material are at different temperatures, heat energy flows from the higher temperature to the lower temperature. The flow ceases when both ends reach the same temperature. Similarly, when the ends of an electric conductor are at different electric potentials-when there is a potential difference-charge flows from one end to the other.1 The flow of charge persists for as long as there is a potential difference. Without a potential difference, no charge flows. Connect one end of a wire to the charged sphere of a Van de Graaff generator, for example, and the other end to the ground, and a surge of charge will flow through the wire. The flow will be brief, however, because the sphere will quickly reach a common potential with the ground.

To attain a sustained flow of charge in a conductor, some arrangement must be provided to maintain a difference in potential while charge flows from one end to the other. The situation is analogous to the flow of water from a higher reservoir to a lower one (Figure 23.1a). Water will flow in a pipe that connects the reservoirs only as long as there is a difference in the water levels. The flow of water in the pipe, like the flow of charge in the wire that connects the Van de Graaff generator to the ground, will cease when the pressures at the two ends are equal (we imply this when we say that water seeks its own level). A continuous flow is possible if the difference in water levels-hence the difference in water pressures-is maintained with the use of a suitable pump (Figure 23.1b).

Figure 23.1
(a) Water flows from the reservoir of higher pressure to the reservoir of lower pressure. The flow ceases when the difference in pressure ceases. (b) Water continues to flow because a difference in pressure is maintained by the pump.

SCREENCAST: Water and Electron Circuits

Check Point
Okay, so a potential difference across the ends of a wire produces current. Instead of saying potential difference, can we as well say voltage?

Check Your Answer
Yes. Recall from Chapter 22 that potential difference and voltage are interchangeable terms-the difference in electric potential between two points in a conducting path. Both are measured in units of volts.

We often think of current flowing through a circuit, but don't say this around somebody who is picky about grammar because the expression "current flows" is redundant. More properly, charge flows-which is current.

Just as water current is the flow of H2O molecules, electric current is simply the flow of electric charge. In circuits of metal wires, electrons make up the flow of charge. This is because one or more electrons from each metal atom are free to move throughout the atomic lattice. These charge carriers are called conduction electrons. Protons, on the other hand, do not move because they are bound inside the nuclei of atoms that are more or less locked in fixed positions. In conducting fluids, however-such as in a car battery-positive ions as well as electrons make up the flow of electric charge.

Andre Marie Ampere is often referred to as "the Newton of electricity." In the 1820s, he showed that parallel wires carrying current in the same direction attract each other, and he postulated that circulating charge is responsible for magnetism. In his honor, the unit for current is amperes, often shortened to amps.

The rate of electrical flow is measured in amperes. One ampere is a rate of flow equal to 1 coulomb of charge per second. (Recall that 1 coulomb, the standard unit of charge, is the electric charge of 6.25 x 10^18 electrons.) In a wire that carries 5 amperes, for example, 5 coulombs of charge pass any cross-section in the wire each second. So that's a lot of electrons! In a wire that carries 10 amperes, twice as many electrons pass any cross-section each second.

Footnote 1
When we say that charge flows, we mean that charged particles flow. Charge is a property of particular particles, most significantly electrons, protons, and ions. When the flow is of negative charge, electrons or negative ions constitute the flow. When the flow of charge is positive, protons or positive ions are flowing.
