Chapter 22, Section 22.6 - Charging
Source PDF pages used: PDF pages 187-189, corresponding to textbook pages 413-415.

22.6 Charging
We charge things by transferring electrons from one place to another. We can do this by physical contact, as occurs when substances are rubbed together or simply touched. Or we can redistribute the charge on an object simply by putting a charged object near it-this is called induction.

Charging by Friction and Contact
We are all familiar with the electrical effects produced by friction. We can stroke a cat's fur and hear the crackle of sparks that are produced, or comb our clean, dry hair in front of a mirror in a dark room and see as well as hear the sparks. We can scuff our shoes across a rug and feel a tingle as charge flows when we touch a doorknob. Talk to old-timers and they'll tell you about the surprising shock they may have received after sliding across a plastic seat cover while parked in an automobile (Figure 22.6). Charge is transferred in clothes in a clothes dryer. In all these cases, electrons are transferred by friction when one material rubs against another.

Figure 22.6
Charging by friction and then by contact.

Electrons can transfer from one material to another through simple touching. For example, when a negatively charged rod is placed in contact with a neutral object, some electrons will move to the neutral object. This method of charging is simply called charging by contact. If the object is a good conductor, electrons will spread to all parts of its surface because the transferred electrons repel one another. If it is a poor conductor, it may be necessary to touch the rod at several places on the object in order to get a more or less uniform distribution of charge.

Charging by Induction
If you bring a charged object near a conducting surface, electrons are made to move in the surface material, even without physical contact. Consider the two insulated metal spheres, A and B, in Figure 22.7. In part (a), the spheres touch each other, so in effect they form a single uncharged conductor. In part (b), when a negatively charged rod is brought near A, electrons in the metal, being free to move, are repelled as far as possible until their mutual repulsion is strong enough to balance the influence of the rod: The charge is redistributed. In parts (c) and (d), if the spheres are separated while the rod is still present, each will be equally and oppositely charged. This is charging by induction. The charged rod has never touched the spheres, and the rod retains the same charge it had initially.

Figure 22.7
INTERACTIVE FIGURE
Charging by induction.

We can similarly charge a single sphere by induction if we touch it when different parts of it are differently charged. Consider the metal sphere that hangs from a nonconducting string as shown in Figure 22.8. When we touch the metal surface with a finger, we are providing a path for charge to flow to or from a very large reservoir for electric charge-the ground. We say that we are grounding the sphere, a process that may leave it with a net charge. We will return to this idea of grounding in Chapter 23 when we discuss electric currents.

Figure 22.8
INTERACTIVE FIGURE
Stages of charge induction by grounding. (a) The net charge on the metal sphere is zero. (b) Charge redistribution is induced on the sphere by the presence of the charged rod. The net charge on the sphere is still zero. (c) Touching the negative side of the sphere removes electrons by contact. (d) This leaves the sphere positively charged. (e) The sphere is more strongly attracted to the negative rod, and, when it touches, charging by contact occurs. (f) The negative sphere is repelled by the still somewhat negatively charged rod.

Charging by induction occurs during thunderstorms. The negatively charged bottoms of clouds induce a positive charge on the surface of the ground below. As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, Benjamin Franklin was the first to demonstrate this when his famous kite-flying experiment proved that lightning is an electrical phenomenon.5 Lightning is an electrical discharge between a cloud and the oppositely charged ground or between oppositely charged parts of clouds.

Franklin also found that charge flows readily to or from sharp metal points, and he fashioned the first lightning rod. The primary purpose of the lightning rod is to prevent a fire caused by lightning. If, for any reason, sufficient charge does not leak from the air to the rod and lightning strikes anyway, it may be attracted to the rod and take a direct path to the ground, thereby sparing the building.

Figure 22.9
The negative charge at the bottom of the cloud induces a positive charge at the surface of the ground below.

Figure 22.10
Lightning rods are connected by heavy-duty wires so that very large currents can be conducted to the ground if lightning strikes. Most often, charge leaks off the rod's pointed tips to prevent the occurrence of lightning.

Check Point
1. Would the charges induced on spheres A and B of Figure 22.7 necessarily be exactly equal and opposite?
2. Why does the negative rod in Figure 22.7 have the same charge both before and after the spheres are charged, but not when charging takes place, as in Figure 22.8?

Lightning occurs mainly in warm climates. As warm water vapor rises in air, it brushes against ice crystals high in the air above, producing a charge similar to what occurs when you scuff your feet on a carpet. The ice crystals gain a slight positive charge, and the updraft carries them to the top of the cloud. So the top of a cloud is usually positively charged, with the bottom negatively charged. Lightning is the bolt that arcs between these regions and between the cloud and the ground below.

Check Your Answers
1. Yes, because each positive charge on sphere A results from an electron taken from A and moved to B. This is like removing bricks from the surface of a brick road and placing them all on the sidewalk. The number of bricks on the sidewalk exactly matches the number of holes in the road. Likewise, the number of extra electrons on B will exactly match the number of "holes" (positive charges) left in A. The positive charge is the result of an absent electron.
2. In the charging process of Figure 22.7, no contact was made between the negative rod and either of the spheres. In Figure 22.8, however, the rod touched the positively charged sphere. A transfer of charge by contact reduced the negative charge on the rod.

5 Benjamin Franklin invented many things that improved the quality of life. He was certainly a very busy man! Only a task as important as helping to form the United States' system of government prevented him from devoting even more of his time to his favorite activity-the scientific investigation of nature.
