Section 2.6 Support Force

Consider a book lying at rest on a table. It is in equilibrium. What forces act on the book? One force is that due to gravity—the weight of the book. Since the book is in equilibrium, there must be another force acting on the book to produce a net force of zero—an upward force opposite to the force of Earth’s gravity. The table exerts this upward force. We call this the upward support force. This upward support force, often called the normal force, must equal the weight of the book.6 If we call the upward force positive, then the downward weight is negative, and the two add to zero. The net force on the book is zero. Another way to say the same thing is ΣF = 0.

Figure 2.15 (Left) The table pushes up on the book with as much force as the downward force of gravity on the book. (Right) The spring pushes up on your hand with as much force as you exert to push down on the spring.

To understand better that the table pushes up on the book, compare the case of compressing a spring (Figure 2.15). If you push the spring down, you can feel the spring pushing up on your hand. Similarly, the book lying on the table compresses atoms in the table, which behave like microscopic springs. The weight of the book squeezes downward on the atoms, and they squeeze upward on the book. In this way, the compressed atoms produce the support force.

When you step on a bathroom scale, two forces act on the scale. One is your downward push on the scale—the result of gravity pulling on you—and the other is the upward support force of the floor. These forces squeeze a mechanism (in effect, a spring) within the scale that is calibrated to show the magnitude of the support force (Figure 2.16). The force with which you push down on the scale is your weight, which has the same magnitude as the upward support force. When you are in equilibrium your weight equals the force of gravity acting on you.

Figure 2.16 Your weight is the force you exert on a supporting surface, which when in equilibrium is the gravitational force on you. The scale reading shows both your weight and the support force.

Check Point
1. What is the net force on a bathroom scale when a 150-pound person stands on it?
2. Suppose you stand on two bathroom scales with your weight evenly divided between the two scales. What will each scale read? What will happen if you stand with more of your weight on one foot than the other?

Check Your Answers
1. Zero, as evidenced by the scale remaining at rest. The scale reads the support force, which has the same magnitude as weight—not the net force.
2. The reading on each scale will be half your weight. Then the sum of the scale readings will balance your weight and the net force on you will be zero. If you lean more on one scale than the other, more than half your weight will be read on that scale but less on the other, so they will still add up to your weight. Like the example of the gymnast hanging by the rings, if one scale reads two-thirds your weight, the other scale will read one-third your weight.

6 In geometry, “normal to” means “at right angles to.” Since this force pushes up at right angles to the surface, it is called a “normal force.”
