24.5 Electric Currents and Magnetic Fields

Since a moving charge produces a magnetic field, it follows that a current of charges also produces a magnetic field. We can demonstrate the magnetic field that surrounds a current-carrying conductor by arranging an assortment of compasses around a wire (Figure 24.8) and passing a current through it. The compass needles line up with the magnetic field produced by the current, and they show the field to be a pattern of concentric circles about the wire. When the current reverses direction, the compass needles turn around, showing that the direction of the magnetic field changes also. This is the effect that Oersted first demonstrated in his classroom.

Figure 24.8
The compasses show the circular shape of the magnetic field surrounding the current-carrying wire.

If the wire is bent into a loop, the magnetic field lines become bunched up inside the loop (Figure 24.9). If the wire is bent into another loop, overlapping the first, the concentration of magnetic field lines inside the loops is doubled. It follows that the magnetic field intensity in this region is increased as the number of loops is increased. The magnetic field intensity is appreciable for a current-carrying coil of many loops.

Figure 24.9
Magnetic field lines about a current-carrying wire bunch up when the wire is bent into a loop.

Figure 24.10c shows the concentration of magnetic field intensity for multiple current-carrying loops. These loops make up a coil, which is known as a solenoid. The total field inside the solenoid is the sum of the fields due to each current loop.

Figure 24.10
Iron filings sprinkled on paper reveal the magnetic field configurations about (a) a current-carrying wire, (b) a current-carrying loop, and (c) a current-carrying coil of loops.

Practicing Physics

Most iron objects around you are magnetized to some degree. A filing cabinet, a refrigerator, and even cans of food on your pantry shelf have north and south poles induced by Earth's magnetic field. If you bring a magnetic compass near the tops of iron or steel objects in your home, you will find that the north pole of the compass needle points to the tops of these objects, and the south pole of the compass needle points to their bottoms. This shows that the objects are magnets, having a south pole on top and a north pole on the bottom. Turn cans of food that have been in a vertical position upside down and see how many days it takes for the poles to reverse themselves!
