CHAPTER 22    Electrostatics

22.5 Conductors and Insulators

It is easy to establish an electric current in a metal because one or more of the electrons in the outer shell of its atoms are not anchored to the nuclei of particular atoms but are free to wander in the material. Such a material is called a good conductor. Any metal is a good conductor of electric current for the same reason it is a good heat conductor--the electrons in the outer atomic shell of its atoms are "loose." The expensive metals such as silver, gold, and platinum are among the very best conductors, don't corrode, and are commonly used in small quantities for high-value products. Copper and aluminum are commonly used in wiring electrical systems because of their good performance and lower cost.

The electrons in other materials--rubber and glass, for example--are tightly bound and belong to particular atoms. They are not free to wander about among other atoms in the material. Consequently, it isn't easy to make them flow. These materials are poor conductors of electric current for the same reason they are generally poor heat conductors. Such a material is called a good insulator. Glass is an extremely good insulator and is used to keep electrical wires away from the metal towers that carry them. Many plastics are also good insulators, which is why wiring in your home is covered with a layer of plastic.

All substances can be arranged in order of their ability to conduct electric charge. Those at the top of such a list would be conductors and those at the bottom would be insulators. The ends of the list are very far apart. The conductivity of a metal, for example, can be more than a million trillion times greater than the conductivity of an insulator such as glass.

Figure 22.4
It is easier to establish an electric current through hundreds of kilometers of metal wire than through a few centimeters of an insulating material.

Semiconductors

The memristor (short for memory resistor) utilizes a thin film of titanium oxide sandwiched between two platinum layers. It packs into chips 100 times more densely than transistors and remembers information without electric power. Will memristors soon appear in computers and wireless devices?

Some materials, such as germanium (Ge) and silicon (Si), are neither good conductors nor good insulators. These materials fall in the middle of the range of electrical resistivity, being fair insulators in their pure crystalline form and becoming excellent conductors when even 1 atom in 10 million is replaced with an impurity that adds or removes an electron from the crystal structure. A material that can be made to behave sometimes as an insulator and sometimes as a conductor is called a semiconductor. Thin layers of semiconducting materials sandwiched together make up transistors, which are used to control the flow of electrons in circuits, to detect and amplify radio signals, and to produce oscillations in transmitters; they also act as digital switches. These tiny solids were the first electrical components in which materials with different electrical characteristics were not interconnected by wires but were physically joined in one structure. They require very little power and last indefinitely with normal use.

A semiconductor will also conduct when light of the proper color shines on it. A pure selenium plate is normally a good insulator, and any electric charge built up on its surface will remain for extended periods in the dark. If the plate is exposed to light, however, the charge leaks away almost immediately. If a charged selenium plate is exposed to a pattern of light, such as the pattern of light and dark that makes up this page, the charge will leak away only from the areas exposed to light. If a black plastic powder were brushed across its surface, the powder would stick only to the charged areas where the plate had not been exposed to light. Now if a piece of paper with an electric charge on the back were put over the plate, the black plastic powder would be drawn to the paper to form the same pattern as, say, the one on this page. This is the nuts and bolts of photocopiers.

Figure 22.5
(a) Three transistors. (b) Many transistors in an integrated circuit.

Superconductors

An ordinary conductor has only a small resistance to the flow of electric charge. An insulator has much greater resistance (we'll treat the topic of electrical resistance in Chapter 23). Remarkably, in certain materials at sufficiently low temperatures, electrical resistance disappears. The materials acquire zero resistance (infinite conductivity) to the flow of charge. Such a material is called a superconductor. Once electric current is established in a superconductor, the electrons flow indefinitely. With no electrical resistance, current passes through a superconductor without losing energy; no heat loss occurs when charges flow. Superconductivity in metals near absolute zero was discovered in 1911. In 1987, superconductivity at a "high" temperature (above 100 K) was discovered in a nonmetallic compound. Superconductivity has since progressed, with applications that include low-loss power-line transmission and high-speed, magnetically levitated vehicles intended to replace traditional rail trains.
