6.3 Impulse Changes Momentum

The greater the impulse exerted on something, the greater will be its change in momentum. The exact relationship is
Impulse = change in momentum

We can express all terms in this relationship in shorthand notation using the delta symbol Δ (a Greek letter often used to denote “change in” or “difference in”):
Ft = Δ(mv)

The impulse–momentum relationship helps us to analyze many examples in which forces act and motion changes. Sometimes the impulse can be considered to be the cause of a change of momentum. Sometimes a change of momentum can be considered to be the cause of an impulse. It doesn’t matter which way you think about it. The important thing is that impulse and change of momentum are always linked. Here we will consider some ordinary examples in which impulse is related to (1) increasing momentum, (2) decreasing momentum over a long time, and (3) decreasing momentum over a short time.

Case 1: Increasing Momentum
To increase the momentum of an object, it makes sense to apply the greatest force possible for as long as possible. A golfer teeing off and a baseball player trying for a home run do both of these things when they swing as hard as possible and follow through with their swings. Following through extends the time of contact.

The forces involved in impulses usually vary from instant to instant. For example, a golf club that strikes a ball exerts zero force on the ball until contact occurs; then the force increases rapidly as the ball is distorted (Figure 6.4). The force then diminishes as the ball comes up to speed and returns to its original shape. So, when we speak of such forces in this chapter, we mean the average force.

Figure 6.4
The force of impact on a golf ball varies throughout the duration of impact.

The symbol p is often used to represent momentum.

Footnote 1
This relationship is derived by rearranging Newton’s second law to make the time factor more evident. If we equate the formula for acceleration, a = F/m, with what acceleration is defined as, a = Δv/Δt, we get F/m = Δv/Δt. From this we derive FΔt = Δ(mv). If we call Δt simply t, the time interval, then Ft = Δ(mv).

Case 2: Decreasing Momentum Over a Long Time
If you were in a car that was out of control and you had to choose between hitting a concrete wall or a haystack, you wouldn’t have to call on your knowledge of physics to make up your mind. Common sense tells you to choose the haystack. But, knowing the physics helps you to understand why hitting a soft object is entirely different from hitting a hard one. In the case of hitting either the wall or the haystack, your momentum is brought to zero by the same impulse. The same impulse does not mean the same amount of force or the same amount of time; rather, it means the same product of force and time. By hitting the haystack instead of the wall, you extend the time during which your momentum is brought to zero. A longer time interval reduces the force and decreases the resulting deceleration. For example, if the time interval is extended 100 times, the force is reduced to a hundredth. Whenever we wish the force to be small, we extend the time of contact—hence, the padded dashboards and airbags that save lives in motor vehicles.

Figure 6.5
If the change in momentum occurs over a long time, the hitting force is small.

Figure 6.6
If the change in momentum occurs over a short time, the hitting force is large.

When you jump from an elevated position down to the ground, what happens if you keep your legs straight and stiff? Ouch! Instead, you bend your knees when your feet make contact with the ground. By doing so you extend the time during which your momentum decreases by 10 to 20 times that of a stiff-legged, abrupt landing. The resulting force on your bones is reduced by 10 to 20 times. A wrestler thrown to the floor tries to extend his time of impact with the mat by relaxing his muscles and spreading the impact into a series of smaller ones as his foot, knee, hip, ribs, and shoulder successively hit the mat. Of course, falling on a mat is preferable to falling on a solid floor because the mat extends the stopping time and so lessens the stopping force.

The safety net used by circus acrobats is a good example of how to achieve the impulse needed for a safe landing. The safety net reduces the stopping force on a fallen acrobat by substantially increasing the stopping time. If you’re about to catch a fast baseball with your bare hand, you extend your hand forward so you’ll have plenty of room for it to move backward after making contact with the ball. When you extend the time of contact, you reduce the force of the catch. Similarly, a boxer rides or rolls with the punch to reduce the force of contact (Figure 6.8).

Figure 6.7
A large change in momentum over a long time requires a safely small average force.

Figure 6.8
In both cases, the impulse provided by the boxer’s jaw reduces the momentum of the punch. (a) When the boxer moves away (rides with the punch), he extends the time and diminishes the force. (b) If the boxer moves into the gloved fist, the time is reduced and he must withstand a greater force.

Case 3: Decreasing Momentum Over a Short Time
When boxing, if you move into a punch instead of away, you’re in trouble because contact time is reduced so force is increased. Likewise if you catch a high-speed baseball while your hand moves toward the ball instead of away upon contact. Or, when your car is out of control, if you drive it into a concrete wall instead of a haystack, you’re really in trouble. In these cases of short contact times, the contact forces are large. Remember that, for an object brought to rest, the impulse is the same no matter how it is stopped. But, if the time is short, the force will be large.

The idea of a short time of contact explains how a karate expert can split a stack of bricks with the blow of her bare hand (Figure 6.9). She brings her arm and hand swiftly against the bricks with considerable momentum. This momentum is quickly reduced when she delivers an impulse to the bricks. The impulse is the force of her hand against the bricks multiplied by the time during which her hand makes contact with the bricks. By swift execution, she makes the time of contact very brief and correspondingly makes the force of impact huge. If her hand is made to bounce upon impact, the force is even greater.

Figure 6.9
Cassy imparts a large impulse to the bricks in a short time and produces a considerable force.

Different forces exerted over different time intervals can produce the same impulse: Ft or Ft

CHECK POINT
1. If the boxer in Figure 6.8 is able to increase the duration of impact to three times as long by riding with the punch, by how much will the force of impact be reduced?
2. If the boxer instead moves into the punch so as to decrease the duration of impact by half, by how much will the force of impact be increased?
3. A boxer being hit with a punch contrives to extend time for best results, whereas a karate expert delivers a force in a short time for best results. Isn’t there a contradiction here?
4. When does impulse equal momentum?

Check Your Answers
1. The force of impact will be only a third of what it would have been if he hadn’t pulled back.
2. The force of impact will be two times greater than it would have been if he had held his head still. Impacts of this kind account for many knockouts.
3. There is no contradiction because the best results for each are quite different. The best result for the boxer is reduced force, which is achieved by maximizing time, and the best result for the karate expert is increased force delivered in minimum time.
4. Generally, impulse equals a change in momentum. If the initial momentum of an object is zero when the impulse is applied, final momentum = impulse applied. And, if an object is brought to rest, initial momentum = impulse delivered.

Media links: SCREENCAST: Momentum; VIDEO: Changing Momentum—Follow-Through; VIDEO: Decreasing Momentum Over a Short Time.
