Chapter 23, Section 23.4 - Ohm's Law
Source PDF used: ~CP_Curriculum_Sections(3).pdf
Textbook pages used: 434-437.

23.4 Ohm's Law
The relationship among voltage, current, and resistance is summarized by Ohm's law. Ohm discovered that the current in a circuit is directly proportional to the voltage established across the circuit and is inversely proportional to the resistance of the circuit. In short,

Current = voltage/resistance

Or, in units,

Amperes = volts/ohms

So, for a given circuit of constant resistance, current and voltage are proportional to each other.5 This means that we'll get twice the current for twice the voltage. The greater the voltage, the greater the current. But, if the resistance of a circuit is doubled, the current will be half what it would be otherwise. The greater the resistance, the smaller the current. Ohm's law makes good sense.

Ohm's law tells us that a potential difference of 1 V established across a circuit that has a resistance of 1 Ω will produce a current of 1 A. If a voltage of 12 V is impressed across the same circuit, the current will be 12 A. The resistance of a typical lamp cord is much less than 1 Ω, while a typical incandescent bulb has a resistance greater than 100 Ω. An iron or an electric toaster has a resistance of 15-20 Ω. Remember that for a given potential difference, less resistance means more current. In the interior of such electrical devices as computers and television receivers, current is regulated by circuit elements called resistors, whose resistance may be a few ohms or millions of ohms.

Figure 23.6
Resistors. The symbol of resistance in an electric circuit is [resistor symbol].

Check Point
1. How much current is drawn by a 60-Ω resistor when a voltage of 12 V is impressed across it?
2. What is the resistance of an electric frying pan that draws 12 A when connected to a 120-V circuit?

Check Your Answers
1. 1/5 A. From Ohm's law: Current = voltage/resistance = 12 V/60 Ω = 0.2 A.
2. 10 Ω. Rearrange Ohm's law: Resistance = voltage/current = 120 V/12 A = 10 Ω.

Ohm's Law and Electric Shock
The damaging effects of electric shock are the result of current passing through the body. What causes electric shock in the body: current or voltage? From Ohm's law, we can see that this current depends both on the voltage that is applied and on the electrical resistance of the human body. The resistance of one's body, which depends on its condition, ranges from about 100 Ω if it is soaked with salt water to about 500,000 Ω if the skin is very dry. If we touch the two electrodes of a battery with dry fingers, completing the circuit from one hand to the other, we can expect to offer a resistance of about 100,000 Ω. We usually cannot feel the current produced by 12 V, and 24 V just barely tingles. If our skin is moist, 24 V can be quite uncomfortable. Table 23.1 lists the effects of different amounts of current on the human body.

Current is a flow of charge, pressured into motion by voltage and hampered by resistance.

Table 23.1 Effects of Electric Currents on the Body
Current (A) Effect
0.001 Can be felt
0.005 Is painful
0.010 Causes involuntary muscle contractions (spasms)
0.015 Causes loss of muscle control
0.070 If through the heart, causes serious disruption; probably fatal if current lasts longer than 1 s

Many people are killed each year by current from common 120-V electric circuits. If you touch a faulty 120-V light fixture with your hand while you are standing on the ground, there is a 120-V "electrical pressure" between your hand and the ground, so the current is probably not enough to do serious harm. But if you are standing barefoot in a wet bathtub connected through its plumbing to the ground, the resistance between you and the ground is very small. Your overall resistance is so low that the 120-V potential difference may produce a harmful current in your body. Handling electrical devices while taking a bath is a definite no-no. Drops of water that collect around the on-off switches of such devices as a hair dryer can conduct current to the user. Although distilled water is a good insulator, the ions in ordinary tap water greatly reduce the electrical resistance. These ions are the result of dissolved materials, especially salts. There is usually a layer of salt left from perspiration on your skin, which, when your skin is wet, lowers your skin resistance to a few hundred ohms or less, depending on the distance over which the voltage acts.

For you to receive a shock, there must be a difference in electric potential between one part of your body and another part. Most of the current will pass along the path of least electrical resistance connecting these two points. Suppose you fell from a bridge and managed to grab onto a high-voltage power line, halting your fall. So long as you touch nothing else that has a different potential, you will receive no shock at all. Even if the wire is a few thousand volts higher than ground potential and you hang by it with two hands, no appreciable charge will flow from one hand to the other. This is because there is no appreciable difference in electric potential between your hands. If, however, you reach over with one hand and grab onto a wire that has a different potential . . . zap! We have all seen birds perched on high-voltage wires. Every part of their bodies is at the same high potential as the wire, so they feel no ill effects.

Figure 23.7
The bird can stand harmlessly on one wire of high potential, but it had better not reach over and grab a neighboring wire!

Check Point
If the two feet of a bird on the high-potential wire of a power line are widely spaced, won't it get a shock?

Check Your Answer
No, because there is no appreciable difference in potential between its feet.

Most electrical plugs and sockets today are wired with three, instead of two, connectors. The principal two flat prongs on an electrical plug are for the current-carrying double wire, one part of which is "live" (energized) and the other neutral, while the round prong connects to a wire in the electrical system that is grounded-connected directly to the ground (Figure 23.8). The electrical appliance at the other end of the plug is, therefore, connected to all three wires. If the live wire of the appliance accidentally comes in contact with the metal surface of the appliance and you touch the appliance, you could receive a dangerous shock. This won't occur when the appliance casing is grounded via the ground wire, which assures that the appliance casing is always at zero ground potential.

Figure 23.8
The round prong connects the body of the appliance directly to ground (Earth). Any charge that builds up on an appliance is therefore conducted to the ground, thereby preventing accidental shock.

Electric shock can overheat tissues in the body and disrupt normal nerve functions. It can upset the rhythmic electrical patterns that maintain proper heartbeat, and it can upset the nerve center that controls breathing. To rescue a shock victim, the first thing to do is locate and turn off the power source. Then do CPR until help arrives. For heart-attack victims, on the other hand, a properly administered electric shock can sometimes be beneficial in getting the heartbeat started again.

Check Point
1. If your body resistance is 100,000 Ω, how much current will you experience if you touch the terminals of a 12-V battery?
2. If your skin is very moist, so that your resistance is only 1000 Ω, and you again touch the battery terminals, how much current will you experience?

Check Your Answers
1. Current = voltage/resistance = 12 V/100,000 Ω = 0.00012 A.
2. Current = voltage/resistance = 12 V/1000 Ω = 0.012 A. Ouch!

Media notes included in HTML:
VIDEO: Ohm's Law
SCREENCAST: Ohm's Law
VIDEO: Handling Electric Wires
VIDEO: Birds and High-Voltage Wires

Footnote 5
Many texts use V for voltage, I for current, and R for resistance, and express Ohm's law as V = IR. It then follows that I = V/R and R = V/I; if any two variables are known, the third can be found. Units are abbreviated V for volts, A for amperes, and Ω for ohms.
