5.2 Newton's Third Law of Motion

Newton's third law states:

Whenever one object exerts a force on a second object, the second object exerts an equal and opposite force on the first.

We can call one force the action force and the other the reaction force. Then we can express Newton's third law in the form:

To every action there is always an opposed equal reaction.

It doesn't matter which force we call action and which we call reaction. The important thing is that they are co-parts of a single interaction and that neither force exists without the other.

When you walk, you interact with the floor. Your feet push against the floor, and the floor pushes against your feet. The two forces occur at the same time (they are simultaneous). Likewise, the tires of a car push against the road while the road pushes back on the tires--the tires and road simultaneously push against each other. In swimming, you interact with the water, pushing the water backward, while the water simultaneously pushes you forward--you and the water push against each other. The reaction forces are what account for our motion in these examples. These forces depend on friction; a person or car on ice, for example, may be unable to exert the action force to produce the needed reaction force. Forces occur in force pairs. Neither force exists without the other.

Figure 5.6
In the interaction between the car and the truck, is the force of impact the same on each? Is the damage the same?

Figure 5.7
Action and reaction forces. Note that when the action is "A exerts force on B," the reaction is simply "B exerts force on A."

Check Point
Does a speeding missile possess force?

Check Your Answer
No, a force is not something an object has, like mass, but is part of an interaction between one object and another. A speeding missile may possess the capability of exerting a force on another object when an interaction occurs, but it does not possess force as a thing in itself. As we will see in the following chapters, a speeding missile does possess momentum and kinetic energy.

Defining Your System

An interesting question often arises: Since action and reaction forces are equal and opposite, why don't they cancel to zero? To answer this question, we must consider the system involved. Consider the system consisting of a single orange in Figure 5.8. The dashed line surrounding the orange encloses and defines the system. The vector that pokes outside the dashed line represents an external force on the system. The system accelerates in accord with Newton's second law. In Figure 5.9, we see that this force is provided by an apple, which doesn't change our analysis. The apple is outside the system. The fact that the orange simultaneously exerts a force on the apple, which is external to the system, may affect the apple (another system), but it doesn't affect the orange. You can't cancel a force on the orange with a force on the apple. So, in this case, the action and reaction forces don't cancel.

Figure 5.8
A force acts on the orange, and the orange accelerates to the right.
INTERACTIVE FIGURE

Figure 5.9
The force on the orange, provided by the apple, is not canceled by the reaction force on the apple. The orange still accelerates.
INTERACTIVE FIGURE

A system may be as tiny as an atom or as large as the universe.

Now let's consider a larger system, enclosing both the orange and the apple. We see the system bounded by the dashed line in Figure 5.10. Notice that the force pair is internal to the orange-apple system. Then these forces do cancel each other. They play no role in accelerating the system. A force external to the system is needed for acceleration. That's where friction with the floor plays a role (Figure 5.11). When the apple pushes against the floor, the floor simultaneously pushes on the apple--an external force on the system. The system accelerates to the right.

Inside a football are trillions and trillions of interatomic forces at play. They hold the ball together, but they play no role in accelerating the ball. Although every one of the interatomic forces is part of an action-reaction pair within the ball, they combine to zero, no matter how many of them there are. A force external to the football, like a kick, is needed to accelerate it. In Figure 5.12, we note a single interaction between the foot and the football.

The football in Figure 5.13, however, does not accelerate. In this case, there are two interactions occurring--two forces acting on the football. If they are simultaneous, equal, and opposite, then the net force is zero. Do the two opposing kicks make up an action-reaction pair? No, because they act on the same object, not on different objects. They may be equal and opposite, but, unless they act on different objects, they are not an action-reaction pair. Get it?

If this is confusing, it may be well to note that Newton had difficulties with the third law himself. (See insightful examples of Newton's third law in the Practicing Physics Book.)

Figure 5.10
In the larger system of orange + apple, action and reaction forces are internal and cancel. If these are the only horizontal forces, with no external force, no acceleration of the system occurs.
INTERACTIVE FIGURE

Figure 5.11
An external horizontal force occurs when the floor pushes on the apple (reaction to the apple's push on the floor). The orange-apple system accelerates.
INTERACTIVE FIGURE

Figure 5.12
A acts on B, and B accelerates.

Figure 5.13
Both A and C act on B. They can cancel each other. If they do, B does not accelerate.

Check Point
1. On a cold, rainy day, you find yourself in a car with a dead battery. You must push the car to move it and get it started. Why can't you move the car by remaining comfortably inside and pushing against the dashboard?
2. Why doesn't a book sitting on a table ever accelerate "spontaneously" in response to the trillions of interatomic forces acting within it?
3. We know that Earth pulls on the Moon. Does it follow that the Moon also pulls on Earth?
4. Can you identify the action and reaction forces in the case of an object falling in a vacuum?

Check Your Answers
1. In this case, the system to be accelerated is the car. If you remain inside and push on the dashboard, the force pair you produce acts and reacts within the system. These forces cancel out as far as any motion of the car is concerned. To accelerate the car, there must be an interaction between the car and something external--for example, you on the outside pushing against the road and on the car.
2. Every one of these interatomic forces is part of an action-reaction pair within the book. These forces add up to zero, no matter how many forces there are. This is what makes Newton's first law apply to the book. The book has zero acceleration unless an external force acts on it.
3. Yes, both pulls make up an action-reaction pair of forces associated with the gravitational interaction between Earth and Moon. We can say that (a) Earth pulls on the Moon and (b) the Moon likewise pulls on Earth, but it is more insightful to think of this as a single interaction--both Earth and the Moon simultaneously pulling on each other, each with the same amount of force. You can't push or pull on something unless that something simultaneously pushes or pulls on you. That's the law!
4. To identify a pair of action-reaction forces in any situation, first identify the pair of interacting objects involved--body A and body B. Body A, the falling object, is interacting (gravitationally) with body B, the whole Earth. So Earth pulls downward on the object (call it action), while the object pulls upward on Earth (reaction).
