5.3 Action and Reaction on Different Masses

As strange as it may first seem, a falling object pulls upward on Earth with as much force as Earth pulls downward on the object. The resulting acceleration of the falling object is evident, while the upward acceleration of Earth is too small to detect. So, strictly speaking, when you step off a curb, the street rises ever so slightly to meet you.

We can see that Earth accelerates slightly in response to a falling object by considering the exaggerated examples of two planetary bodies, parts (a) through (e) in Figure 5.15. The forces between bodies A and B are equal in magnitude and oppositely directed in each case. If the acceleration of planet A is not noticeable in (a), then it is more noticeable in (b), where the difference between the masses is less extreme. In (c), where both bodies have equal mass, the acceleration of object A is as evident as it is for B. Continuing, we see that the acceleration of A becomes even more evident in (d) and even more so in (e).

The role of different masses is evident in a fired cannon. When a cannon is fired, there is an interaction between the cannon and the cannonball (Figure 5.16). A pair of forces acts on both cannon and cannonball. The force exerted on the cannonball is as great as the reaction force exerted on the cannon; hence, the cannon recoils. Since the forces are equal in magnitude, why doesn’t the cannon recoil with the same speed as the cannonball?

Figure 5.14 Earth is pulled up by the boulder with just as much force as the boulder is pulled down by Earth.
Figure 5.15 Which falls toward the other: A or B? Although the forces between each pair are the same, do the accelerations differ?

Figure 5.16 The force exerted against the recoiling cannon is just as great as the force that drives the cannonball inside the barrel. Why, then, does the cannonball accelerate more than the cannon?

When we analyze changes in motion, Newton’s second law reminds us that we must also consider the masses involved. Suppose we let F represent both the action and reaction forces, m the mass of the cannonball, and M the mass of the much more massive cannon. The accelerations of the cannonball and the cannon are then found by comparing the ratios of force to mass:

Cannonball: F/m = a
Cannon: F/M = a

This shows why the change in velocity of the cannonball is so large compared with the change in velocity of the cannon. A given force exerted on a small mass produces a large acceleration, while the same force exerted on a large mass produces a small acceleration.

In the example of the falling object, if we used similarly exaggerated symbols to represent the acceleration of Earth reacting to a falling object, the symbol M for the Earth’s mass would be astronomical in size. The force F due to gravity of the falling object divided by this large mass would result in a microscopic a to represent the acceleration of Earth toward the falling object.

Figure 5.17 The balloon recoils from the escaping air, and it moves upward.

We can extend the idea of a cannon recoiling from the ball it fires to understand rocket propulsion. Consider an inflated balloon recoiling when air is expelled (Figure 5.17). If the air is expelled downward, the balloon accelerates upward. The same principle applies to a rocket, which continuously “recoils” from the ejected exhaust gas. Each molecule of exhaust gas is like a tiny cannonball shot from the rocket (Figure 5.18).

A common misconception is that a rocket is propelled by the impact of exhaust gases against the atmosphere. In fact, before the advent of rockets, it was generally thought that sending a rocket to the Moon was impossible. Why? Because there is no air above Earth’s atmosphere for the rocket to push against. But this is like saying a cannon wouldn’t recoil unless the cannonball had air to push against. Not true! Both the rocket and the recoiling cannon accelerate because of the reaction forces exerted by the material they fire—not because of any pushes on the air. In fact, a rocket operates better above the atmosphere where there is no air resistance.

Figure 5.18 The rocket recoils from the “molecular cannonballs” it fires, and it moves upward.

Jellyfish have been using rocket or jet propulsion for eons.

Using Newton’s third law, we can understand how a helicopter gets its lifting force. The whirling blades are shaped to force air particles down (action), and the air forces the blades up (reaction). This upward reaction force is called lift. When lift equals the force due to gravity on the aircraft, the helicopter hovers in midair. When lift is greater, the helicopter climbs upward.

This is true for birds and airplanes. Birds fly by pushing air downward. The air in turn pushes the bird upward. When the bird is soaring, the wings must be shaped so that moving air particles are deflected downward. Slightly tilted wings that deflect oncoming air downward produce lift on an airplane. Air that is pushed downward continuously maintains lift. This supply of air is obtained by the forward motion of the aircraft, which results from propellers or jets that push air backward. The air, in turn, pushes the propellers or jets forward. We will learn in Chapter 14 that the curved surface of a wing is an airfoil, which enhances the lifting force.

We see Newton’s third law at work everywhere. A fish pushes the water backward with its fins, and the water pushes the fish forward. When the wind pushes against the branches of a tree and the branches push back on the wind, we have whistling sounds. Forces are interactions between different things. Every contact requires at least a twoness; there is no way that an object can exert a force on nothing. Forces, whether large shoves or slight nudges, always occur in pairs, each of which is opposite to the other. Thus, we cannot touch without being touched.

Figure 5.19 Author and wife Lil demonstrate Newton’s third law: You cannot touch without being touched.

Check Point
1. A car accelerates along a road. Identify the force that moves the car.
2. A high-speed bus and an innocent bug have a head-on collision. The force of impact splatters the poor bug over the windshield. Is the corresponding force that the bug exerts against the windshield greater, less, or the same? Is the resulting deceleration of the bus greater than, less than, or the same as that of the bug?

Check Your Answers
1. It is the road that pushes the car along. Really! Only the road provides the horizontal force to move the car forward. How does it do this? The rotating tires of the car push back on the road (action). The road simultaneously pushes forward on the tires (reaction). How about that!
2. The magnitudes of both forces are the same because they constitute an action–reaction force pair that makes up the interaction between the bus and the bug. The accelerations, however, are very different because the masses are different. The bug undergoes an enormous and lethal deceleration, while the bus undergoes a very tiny deceleration—so tiny that the very slight slowing of the bus is unnoticed by its passengers. But, if the bug were more massive—as massive as another bus, for example—the slowing down would unfortunately be very apparent. (Can you see the wonder of physics here? Although so much is different for the bug and the bus, the amount of force each encounters is the same. Amazing!)

Figure 5.20 The bricks were originally straight. Do you see the evidence for cars pushing backward on the road as they accelerate forward? Or pushing forward on the road as they brake?

Practicing Physics: Tug-of-War
Perform a tug-of-war between guys and gals. Do it on a polished floor that’s somewhat slippery, with guys wearing socks and gals wearing rubber-soled shoes. Who will surely win, and why? (Hint: Who wins a tug-of-war: those who pull harder on the rope or those who push harder against the floor?)
