4.3 Mass and Weight

The acceleration imparted to an object depends not only on applied forces and friction forces but also on the inertia of the object, its resistance to changes in its motion. How much inertia an object possesses depends on the amount of matter in the object—the more matter, the more inertia. In speaking of how much matter something has, we use the term mass. Our current understanding of mass delves into its source, the recently discovered Higgs boson. (Intriguing, indeed, and we’ll touch on that in Chapter 32.) For now you’ll first want to understand mass in its simplest sense—as a measure of the inertia of a material object. The greater the mass of an object, the greater its inertia.

SCREENCAST: Mass/Weight

Mass corresponds to our intuitive notion of weight. We casually say that something has a lot of matter if it weighs a lot. But there is a difference between mass and weight. We can define each as follows:

Mass: The quantity of matter in an object. It is also the measure of the inertia or sluggishness that an object exhibits in response to any effort made to start it, stop it, or change its state of motion in any way.

Weight: Usually the force upon an object due to gravity.

Figure 4.6
At equilibrium on a weighing scale, weight (mg) is balanced by an upward support force.

We say usually in the definition of weight because an object can have weight when gravity is not a factor, such as occurs in a rotating space station. In any event, near Earth’s surface and in the absence of acceleration, mass and weight are directly proportional to each other.2

The weight of an object of mass m due to gravity equals mg, where g is the constant of proportionality and has the value 10 N/kg (more precisely, 9.8 N/kg). Equivalently, g is the acceleration due to gravity, 10 m/s2 (the unit N/kg is equivalent to m/s2).

The direct proportion of mass to weight tells us that if the mass of an object is doubled, its weight is also doubled; if the mass is halved, the weight is halved. Because of this, mass and weight are often interchanged. Also, mass and weight are sometimes confused because it is customary to measure the quantity of matter in things (mass) by their gravitational attraction to Earth (weight). But mass is more fundamental than weight; it is a fundamental quantity that completely escapes the notice of most people.

When 1 N acts on 1 kg, acceleration = 1 m/s2. With units, a = F/m reads 1 m/s2 = 1 N/1 kg. So units m/s2 and N/kg are equivalent.

There are times when weight corresponds to our unconscious notion of inertia. For example, if you are trying to determine which of two small objects is the heavier one, you might shake them back and forth in your hands or move them in some way instead of lifting them. In doing so, you are judging which of the two is more difficult to get moving, feeling which of the two is more resistant to a change in motion. You are really comparing the inertias of the objects—their masses.

In the United States, the quantity of matter in an object is commonly described by the gravitational pull between it and Earth, or its weight, usually expressed in pounds. In most of the world, however, the measure of matter is commonly expressed in a mass unit, the kilogram. At the surface of Earth, a brick with a mass of 1 kilogram weighs 2.2 pounds. In metric units, the unit of force is the newton, which is equal to a little less than a quarter-pound (like the weight of a quarter-pound hamburger after it is cooked). A 1-kilogram brick weighs about 10 newtons (more precisely, 9.8 N).3

Figure 4.7
The astronaut in space finds that it is just as difficult to shake the “weightless” anvil as it would be on Earth. If the anvil were more massive than the astronaut, which would shake more: the anvil or the astronaut?

Away from Earth’s surface, where the influence of gravity is less, a 1-kilogram brick weighs less. It would also weigh less on the surface of planets that have weaker gravity than Earth. On the Moon’s surface, for example, where the gravitational force on things is only one-sixth as strong as on Earth, a 1-kilogram brick weighs about 1.6 newtons (or 0.36 pound). On planets with stronger gravity, it would weigh more, but the mass of the brick is the same everywhere. The brick offers the same resistance to speeding up or slowing down regardless of whether it’s on Earth, on the Moon, or on any other body attracting it. In a drifting spaceship, where a scale with a brick on it reads zero, the brick still has mass. Even though it doesn’t press down on the scale, the brick has the same resistance to a change in motion as it has on Earth. Just as much force would have to be exerted by an astronaut in the spaceship to shake it back and forth as would be required to shake it back and forth while on Earth. You’d have to provide the same amount of push to accelerate a huge truck to a given speed on a level surface on the Moon as on Earth. The difficulty of lifting it against gravity (weight), however, is something else. Mass and weight are different from each other (Figure 4.7).

A nice demonstration that distinguishes mass and weight is a massive ball suspended on a string as shown in the Chapter 2 opener photo and in Figure 4.8. The top string breaks when the lower string is pulled with a gradual increase in force, but the lower string breaks when the lower string is jerked. Which of these cases emphasizes the weight of the ball, and which emphasizes the mass of the ball? Note that only the top string bears the weight of the ball. So, when the lower string is gradually pulled, the tension supplied by the pull is transmitted to the top string. The total tension in the top string is the pull plus the weight of the ball. When the breaking point is reached, the top string breaks. But, when the lower string is jerked, the mass of the ball—its tendency to remain at rest—is responsible for the lower string breaking.

Figure 4.8
Why will a slow, continuous increase in downward force break the string above the massive ball, while a sudden increase will break the lower string?

It is also easy to confuse mass and volume. When we think of a massive object, we often think of a big object. An object’s size (volume), however, is not necessarily a good indication of its mass. Which is easier to get moving: a car battery or an empty cardboard box of the same size? So, we find that mass is neither weight nor volume.

Figure 4.9
INTERACTIVE FIGURE
The greater the mass, the greater the force must be for a given acceleration.

Check Point
1. Does a 2-kg iron brick have twice as much inertia as a 1-kg iron brick? Twice as much mass? Twice as much volume? Twice as much weight?
2. In which case would it be easier to lift a cement truck: on Earth’s surface or on the Moon’s surface?

Check Your Answers
1. The answers to all parts are yes.
2. A cement truck would be easier to lift on the Moon because the gravitational force is less on the Moon. When you lift an object, you are contending with the force of gravity (its weight). Although its mass is the same anywhere, its weight is only 1/6 as much on the Moon, so only 1/6 as much effort is required to lift it there. To move the truck horizontally on the Moon, however, you are not pushing against gravity. When mass is the only factor, equal forces will produce equal accelerations, whether the object is on Earth or on the Moon.

Mass Resists Acceleration

Push your friend on a skateboard and your friend accelerates. Now push equally hard on an elephant on a skateboard and the acceleration is much less. You’ll see that the amount of acceleration depends not only on the force but also on the mass being pushed. The same force applied to twice the mass produces half the acceleration; for three times the mass, one-third the acceleration. We say that, for a given force, the acceleration produced is inversely proportional to the mass; that is,

Acceleration ∼ 1/mass

By inversely we mean that the two values change in opposite ways. For example, if one value doubles, the other value halves.

Figure 4.10
An enormous force is required to accelerate this three-story-high earth mover when it carries a typical 350-ton load. Also, enormous-force brakes are required to stop it.

2 In Chapter 8 we’ll discuss how the support force provided by rotation produces a simulated gravity, in which an astronaut in a rotating space habitat experiences weight.

3 So 2.2 lb equal 9.8 N, or 1 N is approximately equal to 0.22 lb—about the weight of a small apple. In the metric system it is customary to specify quantities of matter in units of mass (in grams or kilograms) and rarely in units of weight (in newtons). In the United States and countries that use the British system of units, however, quantities of matter are customarily specified in units of weight (in pounds). (The British unit of mass, the slug, is not well known.) See Appendix A for more about systems of measurement.
