500

part s i x

Light

For instructor-assigned homework, go to www.masteringphysics.com

S u m m a r y o f T e r m s (KNOWLEDGE)
Electromagnetic wave An energy-carrying wave emitted by
a vibrating charge (often electrons) that is composed of
oscillating electric and magnetic fields that regenerate
one another.
Electromagnetic spectrum The range of electromagnetic
waves extending in frequency from radio waves to
gamma rays.
Transparent The property of materials to pass light in
straight lines without being scattered.
Opaque The property of materials not to allow passage of
light (opposite of transparent).

Shadow A shaded region that appears where light rays are
blocked by an object.
Umbra The darker part of a shadow where all the light is
blocked.
Penumbra A partial shadow that appears where some but not
all of the light is blocked.
Solar eclipse An event in which the Moon blocks light from
the Sun and the Moon’s shadow falls on part of Earth.
Lunar eclipse An event in which the Moon passes into the
shadow of Earth.

R e a d i n g C h e c k Q u e s t i o n s ( C O M P R E H E N SI O N )
26.1 Electromagnetic Waves
1. What does a changing magnetic field induce?
2. What does a changing electric field induce?
3. What produces an electromagnetic wave?
26.2 Electromagnetic Wave Velocity
4. How is the fact that an electromagnetic wave in space
never slows down consistent with the conservation of
energy?
5. How is the fact that an electromagnetic wave in space
never speeds up consistent with the conservation of
energy?
6. What do electric and magnetic fields contain and
transport?
26.3 The Electromagnetic Spectrum
7. What is the principal difference between a radio wave
and light? Between light and an X-ray?
8. About how much of the measured electromagnetic spectrum does light occupy?
9. What is the color of visible light of the lowest frequencies? Of the highest frequencies?
10. How does the frequency of a radio wave compare to the
frequency of the vibrating electrons that produce it?
11. How is the wavelength of light related to its frequency?
12. What is the wavelength of a wave that has a frequency of
1 Hz and travels at 300,000 km/s?
13. What do we mean when we say that outer space is not
really empty?
26.4 Transparent Materials
14. The sound coming from one tuning fork can force
another tuning fork to vibrate. What is the analogous
effect for light?

15. In what region of the electromagnetic spectrum is the
resonant frequency of electrons in glass?
16. What is the fate of the energy in ultraviolet light that is
incident upon glass?
17. What is the fate of the energy in visible light that is incident on glass?
18. What is the fate of the energy in infrared light that is
incident on glass?
19. How does the frequency of reemitted light in a transparent material compare with the frequency of the light that
stimulates its reemission?
20. How does the average speed of light in glass compare
with its speed in a vacuum?
21. How does the speed of light that emerges from a pane of
glass compare with the speed of light incident on the glass?
22. Why are infrared waves often called heat waves?
26.5 Opaque Materials
23. Why do opaque materials become warmer when light
shines on them?
24. Why are metals shiny?
25. Why do wet objects normally look darker than the same
objects when dry?
26. Distinguish between an umbra and a penumbra.
27. Do Earth and the Moon always cast shadows? What
do we call the occurrence where one passes within the
shadow of the other?
26.6 Seeing Light—The Eye
28. How do the rods in the eye differ from the cones?
29. When are objects on the periphery of your vision most
noticeable?
30. What besides the amount of light affects the size of the
pupil of the eye?

C H A P T E R 2 6    r e v i e w

501

T h i n k A n d D o ( H A N D S - O N A P P L I C AT I O N )
31. Compare the size of the Moon on the horizon with its
size higher in the sky. One way to do this is to hold at
arm’s length various objects that will just barely block
out the Moon. Experiment until you find something just
right, perhaps a thick pencil or a pen. You’ll find that the
object will be smaller than a centimeter, depending on
the length of your arms. Is the Moon really bigger when
it is near the horizon?
32. Which eye do you use more? To test which you favor,
hold a finger up at arm’s length. With both eyes
open, look past it at a distant object. Now close your

right eye. If your finger
appears to jump to the
right, then you use your
right eye more. Check
with friends who are both
left-handed and righthanded. Is there a correlation between dominant
eye and dominant hand?

T h i n k a n d S o l v e ( M AT H E M AT I C A L A P P L I C AT I O N )
33. In 1676, the Danish astronomer Ole Roemer had one
of those “aha” moments in science. He concluded from
accumulated observations of eclipses of Jupiter’s moon
at different times of the year that light must travel at
finite speed and needed 1300 s to cross the diameter of
Earth’s orbit around the Sun. Using 300,000,000 km for
the diameter of Earth’s orbit, calculate the speed of light
based on Roemer’s 1300-s estimate. How does it differ
from a modern value for the speed of light?
34. More than 200 years later, Albert A. Michelson sent a
beam of light from a revolving mirror to a stationary
mirror 15 km away. Show that the time interval between
light leaving and returning to the revolving mirror was
0.0001 s.
35. The Sun is 1.50 3 1011 m from Earth. How long does it
take the Sun’s light to reach Earth? How long does it take
light to cross the diameter of Earth’s orbit? Compare this
time with the time measured by Roemer in the 17th century (treated in Problem 33).
36. Show that it would take about 2.5 s for a pulse of laser
light to reach the Moon and to bounce back to Earth.
37. The nearest star beyond the Sun is Alpha Centauri,
4.2 3 1016 m away. If we were to receive a radio message
from this star today, show that it would have been sent
4.4 years ago.
38. A ball with the same diameter as a lightbulb is held halfway between the bulb and a wall, as shown in the sketch.

Construct light rays (similar to those in Figure 26.15) and
show that the diameter of the umbra on the wall is the
same as the diameter of the ball and that the diameter of
the penumbra is three times the diameter of the ball.
Lamp

Ball

Wall

39. A certain radar installation tracks airplanes by transmitting electromagnetic radiation of wavelength 3 cm.
(a) Show that the frequency of this radiation is 10 GHz.
(b) Show that the time required for a pulse of radar
waves to reach an airplane 5 km away and return is
3.3 3 1025 s.
40. The wavelength of light changes as light goes from
one medium to another, while the frequency remains
the same. Is the wavelength longer or shorter in water
than in air? Explain in terms of the equation speed 5
frequency 3 wavelength. A certain orange light has a
wavelength of 600 nm (6 3 1027 m) in air. What is its
wavelength in water, where light travels at 75% of its
speed in air? In Plexiglas, where light travels at 67% of
its speed in air?

T h i n k a n d E x pl a i n ( S Y N T H E SIS )
41. A friend says, in a profound tone, that light is the only
thing we can see. Is your friend correct?
42. Your friend goes on to say that light is produced by the
connection between electricity and magnetism. Is your
friend correct?
43. What is the fundamental source of electromagnetic
radiation?
44. Which have the longest wavelengths: light waves, X-rays,
or radio waves?
45. Which has shorter wavelengths: ultraviolet or infrared?
Which has higher frequencies?

46. How is it possible to take photographs in complete
darkness?
47. What is it, exactly, that waves in a light wave?
48. What is the principal difference between a gamma ray
and an infrared ray?
49. What is the speed of X-rays in a vacuum?
50. Which travels faster through a vacuum: an infrared ray
or a gamma ray?
51. Your friend says that microwaves and ultraviolet light
have different wavelengths but travel through space at the
same speed. Do you agree or disagree?

502

part s i x

Light

52. Your friend says that any radio wave travels appreciably
faster than any sound wave. Do you agree or disagree,
and why?
53. Your friend says that outer space, instead of being empty,
is chock full of electromagnetic waves. Do you agree or
disagree?
54. Are the wavelengths of radio and television signals longer
or shorter than waves detectable by the human eye?
55. Suppose a light wave and a sound wave have the same
frequency. Which has the longer wavelength?
56. Which requires a physical medium in which to travel:
light, sound, or both? Explain.
57. Do radio waves travel at the speed of sound, at the speed
of light, or somewhere in between?
58. What are the similarities and differences between radio
waves and light?
59. A helium–neon laser emits light of wavelength 633 nano­
meters (nm). Light from an argon laser has a wavelength
of 515 nm. Which laser emits the higher-frequency light?
60. Why would you expect the speed of light to be slightly
less in the atmosphere than in a vacuum?
61. Is glass transparent or opaque to light of frequencies that
match its own natural frequencies? Explain.
62. Short wavelengths of visible light interact more frequently with the atoms in glass than do longer wavelengths.
Does this interaction time tend to speed up or to slow
down the average speed of short-wavelength light in
glass?
63. What determines whether a material is transparent or
opaque?
64. You can get a sunburn on a cloudy day, but you can’t get
a sunburn even on a sunny day if you are behind glass.
Explain.
65. Suppose that sunlight falls both on a pair of reading
glasses and on a pair of dark sunglasses. Which pair of

glasses would you expect to become warmer? Defend
your answer.
66. Why does a high-flying airplane cast little or no shadow
on the ground below while a low-flying airplane casts a
sharp shadow?
67. Light from a location on which you concentrate your
attention falls on your fovea, which contains only cones.
If you wish to observe a weak source of light, like a faint
star, why shouldn’t you look directly at the source?
68. Why do objects illuminated by moonlight lack color?
69. Why don’t we see color at the periphery of our vision?
70. Why should you be skeptical when your sweetheart holds
you and looks at you with constricted pupils and says, “I
love you"?
71. From your experimentation with Figure 26.17, is your
blind spot located noseward from your fovea or to the
outside of it?
72. Can we infer that a person with large pupils is generally
happier than a person with small pupils? If not, why not?
73. The planet Jupiter is more than five times as far from the
Sun as planet Earth. How does the brightness of the Sun
appear at this greater distance?
74. When you look at the night sky, some stars are brighter
than others. Can you correctly say that the brightest stars
emit more light? Defend your answer.
75. When you look at a distant galaxy through a telescope,
how is it that you’re looking backward in time?
76. When we look at the Sun, we are seeing it as it was
8 minutes ago. So we can see the Sun only “in the past.”
When you look at the back of your own hand, do you see
it “now” or “in the past”?
77. “20/20 vision” is an arbitrary measure of vision—­
meaning that you can read what an average person can
read at a distance of 20 feet in daylight. What is this
­distance in meters?

T h i n k a n d D i s c u ss ( E V A L U A T I O N )
78. We hear people talk of “ultraviolet light” and “infrared
light.” Why are these terms misleading? Why are we less
likely to hear people talk of “radio light” and “X-ray light”?
79. Knowing that interplanetary space consists of a vacuum,
what is your evidence that electromagnetic waves can
travel through a vacuum?
80. Can you see radio waves? Can you hear radio waves? Discuss
this with people who still confuse sound and radio waves.
81. When astronomers observe a supernova explosion in a
distant galaxy, they see a sudden, simultaneous rise in
visible light and other forms of electromagnetic radiation.
Is this evidence to support the idea that the speed of light
is independent of frequency? Explain.
82. If you fire a bullet through a board, it will slow down
inside and emerge at a speed that is less than the speed at
which it entered. Does light, then, similarly slow down
when it passes through glass and also emerge at a lower
speed? Defend your answer.

83. Pretend that a person can walk only at a certain pace—no
faster, no slower. If you time her uninterrupted walk across
a room of known length, you can calculate her walking
speed. If, however, she stops momentarily along the way to
greet others in the room, the extra time spent in her brief
interactions gives an average speed across the room that is
less than her walking speed. How is this similar to light
passing through glass? In what way does it differ?
84. Only some of the people on the daytime side of Earth
can witness a solar eclipse when it occurs, whereas all the
people on the nighttime side of Earth can witness a lunar
eclipse when it occurs. Why is this so?
85. Do planets cast shadows? What is your evidence?
86. Lunar eclipses are always eclipses of a full Moon. That is,
the Moon is always seen full just before and after Earth’s
shadow passes over it. Why is this? Why can’t we ever
have a lunar eclipse when the Moon is in its crescent or
half-moon phase?

