--- PDF page index 214 / textbook page 446 ---
446
Electricit y and Magnetism
part five
23.1 Flow of Charge and Electric Current
	 1.	What condition is necessary for the flow of heat? What 
analogous condition is necessary for the flow of charge?
	 2.	What condition is necessary for the sustained flow of 
water in a pipe? What analogous condition is necessary 
for the sustained flow of charge in a wire?
	 3.	Why are electrons, rather than protons, the principal 
charge carriers in metal wires?
	 4.	What exactly is an ampere?
23.2 Voltage Sources
	 5.	Name two kinds of practical “electric pumps.”
	 6.	How much energy is supplied to each coulomb of charge 
that flows through a 12-V battery?
	 7.	Does electric charge flow across a circuit or through a 
circuit? Does voltage flow across a circuit or is it impressed 
across a circuit?
23.3 Electrical Resistance
	 8.	Will water flow more easily through a wide pipe or a nar-
row pipe? Will current flow more easily through a thick 
wire or a thin wire?
	 9.	Does heating a metal wire increase or decrease its electri-
cal resistance?
	10.	What is the unit of electrical resistance?
23.4 Ohm’s Law
	 11.	If the voltage impressed across a circuit is held constant while 
the resistance doubles, what change occurs in the current?
	12.	If the resistance of a circuit remains constant while the 
voltage across the circuit decreases to half its former 
value, what change occurs in the current?
	13.	How does wetness affect the resistance of your body?
	14.	What is the function of the round third prong in a mod-
ern household electrical plug?
23.5 Direct Current and Alternating Current
	 15.	Does a battery produce dc or ac? Does the generator at a 
power station produce dc or ac?
	16.	What does it mean to say that a certain current is 
60 Hz?
	 17.	What property of a diode enables it to convert ac to 
pulsed dc?
	18.	A diode converts ac to pulsed dc. What electrical device 
smoothes the pulsed dc to a smoother dc?
23.6 Speed and Source of Electrons in a Circuit
	 19.	What is the error in saying that electrons in a com-
mon battery-driven circuit travel at about the speed 
of light?
	20.	Why does a wire that carries electric current become 
hot?
	21.	What is meant by drift velocity?
	22.	A tipped domino sends a pulse along a row of standing 
dominoes. Is this a good analogy for the way electric 
­current, sound, or both travel?
	23.	What is the error in saying that the source of electrons in 
a circuit is the battery or generator?
R e a d i n g  C h e c k  Q u e s t i o n s  ( C O M P R E H E N S I O N )
Potential difference  The difference in electric potential 
between two points, measured in volts (synonymous with 
voltage difference or simply voltage).
Electric current  The flow of electric charge that transports 
energy from one place to another, measured in amperes, 
where 1 A is the flow of 6.25 3 1018 electrons per second, 
or 1 coulomb per second.
Electrical resistance  The property of a material that resists 
electric current, measured in ohms (Ω).
Ohm’s law  The statement that the current in a circuit var-
ies in direct proportion to the potential difference or 
voltage across the circuit and inversely with the circuit’s 
resistance:
Current =
voltage
resistance
  	
A potential difference of 1 V across a resistance of 1 Ω 
produces a current of 1 A.
Direct current (dc)  Electrically charged particles flowing in 
one direction only.
Alternating current (ac)  Electrically charged particles that 
repeatedly reverse direction, vibrating about relatively 
fixed positions. In the United States, the vibrational rate 
is commonly 60 Hz.
Electric power  The rate of energy transfer, or the rate of 
doing work; the amount of energy per unit time, which 
can be computed as the product of current and voltage:
Power = current * voltage
  	
Electric power is measured in watts (or kilowatts), where 
1 W 5 1 A 3 1 V 5 1 J/s.
Series circuit  An electric circuit in which electrical devices 
are connected along a single loop of wire such that the 
same current is in each device.
Parallel circuit  An electric circuit in which electrical devices 
are connected in such a way that the same voltage acts 
across each one, and any single one completes the circuit 
independently of all the others.
S u m m a r y  O f  T e r m s  ( K N O W L E D G E )
For instructor-assigned homework, go to www.masteringphysics.com 


--- PDF page index 215 / textbook page 447 ---
447
CHAPTER 23 
 
Review
	24.	When you make your household electric payment at the 
end of the month, which are you billed for: voltage, cur-
rent, power, or energy?
	25.	From where do the electrons originate that produce an 
electric shock when you touch a charged conductor?
23.7 Electric Power
	26.	What is the relationship among electric power, current, 
and voltage?
	 27.	Which of these is a unit of power and which is a unit of 
energy: a watt, a kilowatt, a kilowatt-hour?
23.8 Lamps
	28.	How does the heat emitted by lamps affect their 
efficiency?
23.9 Electric Circuits
	29.	In a circuit of two lamps in series, if the current through 
one lamp is 1 A, what is the current through the other 
lamp? Defend your answer.
	30.	If a voltage of 6 V is impressed across the circuit in 
the preceding question and the voltage across the first 
lamp is 2 V, what is the voltage across the second lamp? 
Defend your answer.
	31.	In a circuit of two lamps in parallel, if there is a voltage 
of 6 V across one lamp, what is the voltage across the 
other lamp?
	32.	How does the sum of the currents through the branches 
of a simple parallel circuit compare with the current in 
the voltage source?
	33.	What is the function of fuses or circuit breakers in a 
circuit?
T h i n k  A n d  D o  ( H A N D S - O N  A P P L I C AT I O N )
	34.	An electric cell is made by placing two plates made 
of different materials that have different affinities for 
electrons in a conducting solution. The voltage of a cell 
depends on the materials used and the solutions they are 
placed in, not on the size of the plates. (A cell is often 
called a battery, but strictly speaking, a battery is a series 
of cells—for instance, six cells in a 12-V car battery.) You 
can make a simple 1.5-V cell by placing a strip of copper 
and a strip of zinc in a tumbler of saltwater.
	
	 	
An easy cell to construct is the citrus cell. Stick a 
straightened paper clip and a piece of copper wire into a 
lemon. Hold the ends of the wire close together, but not 
touching, and place the ends on your tongue. The slight 
tingle you feel and the metal-
lic taste you experience result 
from a slight electric current 
from the citrus cell through 
the wires when your moist 
tongue closes the circuit.
	35.	Examine the electric meter 
in your house. It is probably in the basement or on the 
outside of the house. You will see that, in addition to the 
clocklike dials in the meter, there is a circular aluminum 
disk that spins between the poles of magnets when 
electric current goes into the house. The more electric 
current, the faster the disk turns. The speed of the disk 
is directly proportional to the number of watts used; for 
example, it spins 5 times as fast for 500 W as for 100 W.
	
	 	
You can use the meter to determine how many watts 
an electrical device uses. First, make sure that all electrical 
devices in your home are disconnected (it is okay to ignore 
electric clocks and other 2-W devices, which will hardly 
be noticeable). The disk will be practically stationary. 
Then connect a 100-W bulb and note how many seconds 
it takes for the disk to make five complete revolutions. 
The black spot painted on the edge of the disk makes this 
easy. Disconnect the 100-W bulb and plug in a device of 
unknown wattage. Again, count the seconds for five revo-
lutions. If it takes the same time, it’s a 100-W device; if it 
takes twice the time, it’s a 50-W device; half the time, a 
200-W device; and so forth. In this way you can estimate 
the power consumption of devices fairly accurately.
	36.	Send a letter to Grandma and convince her that whatever 
electric shocks she may have received over the years have 
been due to the movement of electrons already in her 
body—not electrons from somewhere else.
Copper wire
Lemon
Paper clip
P L U G  A N D  C H U G  ( E Q U AT I O N  F A M I L I A R I Z AT I O N )
Ohm’s law: I 5 V
R
	 37.	A toaster has a heating element of 15 Ω and is connected 
to a 120-V outlet. Show that the current drawn by the 
toaster is 8 A.
	38.	When you touch your fingers (resistance 1000 Ω) to the 
terminals of a 6-V battery, show that the small current 
moving through your fingers is 0.006 A.
	39.	Calculate the current in the 240-V filament of a bulb 
connected to a 120-V line.
Power 5 I 3 V
	40.	An electric toy draws 0.5 A from a 120-V outlet. Show 
that the toy consumes 60 W of power.
	41.	Calculate the power of a hair dryer that operates on  
120 V and draws a current of 10 A.


--- PDF page index 216 / textbook page 448 ---
448
Electricit y and Magnetism
part five
	42.	What is the effect on the current in a wire if both the 
voltage across it and its resistance are doubled? If both are 
halved?
	43.	The wattage marked on a lightbulb is not an inherent 
property of the bulb but depends on the voltage to which it 
is connected, usually 110 V or 120 V. How many amperes 
flow through a 60-W bulb connected in a 120-V circuit?
	44.	Rearrange the equation current 5 voltage/resistance to 
express resistance in terms of current and voltage. Then 
solve the following: A certain device in a 120-V circuit 
has a current rating of 20 A. What is the resistance of the 
device (how many ohms)?
	45.	Using the formula power 5 current 3 voltage, find the 
current drawn by a 1200-W toaster connected to 120 V. 
Then, using the method from the preceding problem, 
show that the resistance of the toaster is 12 V.
	46.	The total charge that an automobile battery can supply 
without being recharged is given in terms of ampere-
hours. A typical 12-V battery has a rating of 60 ampere-
hours (60 A for 1 h, 30 A for 2 h, and so on). Suppose 
that you forget to turn the headlights off in your parked 
automobile. If each of the two headlights draws 3 A, how 
long will it be before your battery is “dead”?
	 47.	Show that operating a 100-W lamp continuously for 1 week 
when the power utility rate is 15¢/kWh costs $2.52.
	48.	A 4-W night-light is plugged into a 120-V circuit and oper-
ates continuously for 1 year. Find the following: (a) the 
current it draws, (b) the resistance of its filament, (c) the 
energy consumed in a year. (d) Then show that for a utility 
rate of 15¢/kWh the cost for a year’s operation is $5.25.
	49.	An electric iron connected to a 110-V source draws 9 A 
of current. Show that the amount of heat it generates in a 
minute is nearly 60,000 J.
	50.	Show in the preceding problem that 540 C of charge 
flows through the iron in 1 minute.
	 51.	In periods of peak demand, power companies lower their 
voltage. This saves them power (and saves you money!). To 
see the effect, consider a 1200-W coffeemaker that draws 
10 A when connected to 120 V. Suppose the voltage is 
lowered by 10% to 108 V. By how much does the current 
decrease? By how much does the power decrease? (Caution: 
The 1200-W label is valid only when 120 V is applied. 
When the voltage is lowered, the current is lowered, so the 
power output of the toaster’s heating coils drops, which 
cools the coil and lowers its resistance. However, for this 
problem assume the change in resistance is slight.)
T h i n k  A n d  S o l v e  ( M AT H E M AT I C A L  A P P L I C AT I O N )
T h i n k  A n d  R a n k  ( A N A LY S I S )
	52.	Rank the circuits illustrated according to the brightness 
of the identical bulbs, from brightest to dimmest.
	53.	The bulbs shown are identical. An ammeter is placed in 
different locations, as shown. Rank the current readings 
in the ammeter, from greatest to least.
	54.	All bulbs are identical in the circuits shown. An ammeter 
is connected next to the battery, as shown. Rank the cur-
rent readings in the ammeter, from greatest to least.
	55.	All bulbs are identical in the circuits shown. A voltmeter is 
connected across a single bulb to measure the voltage drop 
across it. Rank the voltage readings from greatest to least.
	56.	Consider the three parts of the circuit: 
A, the top branch with two bulbs; B, the 
middle branch with one bulb; C, the 
battery.
	
a.	Rank the currents through each, from 
greatest to least.
	
b.	Rank the voltages across each, from 
greatest to least.
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C


--- PDF page index 217 / textbook page 449 ---
449
CHAPTER 23 
 
Review
	 57.	What condition is necessary for a sustained flow of elec-
tric charge through a conducting medium?
	58.	What two things can be done to increase the amount of 
flow in a water pipe? Similarly, what two things can be 
done to increase the current in an electric circuit?
	59.	Consider a water pipe that branches into two smaller 
pipes. If the flow of water is 10 gallons per minute in 
the main pipe and 4 gallons per minute in one of the 
branches, how much water per minute flows in the other 
branch?
	60.	Consider a circuit with a main wire that branches into 
two other wires. If the current is 10 A in the main wire 
and 4 A in one of the branches, how much current is in 
the other branch?
	61.	One example of a water system is a garden hose that 
waters a garden. Another is the cooling system of an 
automobile. Which of these systems exhibits behavior 
more analogous to an electric circuit? Explain.
	62.	What happens to the brightness of light emitted 
by a lightbulb when the current flowing through it 
increases?
	63.	The circuit within an incandescent lamp is shown. 
Which of the battery arrangements will light the lamp?
	64.	Your friend says that a battery supplies the electrons in 
an electric circuit. Do you agree or disagree? Defend your 
answer.
	65.	How much energy is given to each coulomb of charge 
passing through a 6-V battery?
	66.	Is a current-carrying wire electrically charged because of 
the electrons moving in it?
	 67.	Your tutor tells you that an ampere and a volt really meas-
ure the same thing and that the different terms only serve 
to make a simple concept seem confusing. Why should 
you consider getting a different tutor?
	68.	In which of the circuits shown does a current exist to 
light the bulb?
	69.	Does more current flow out of a battery than into it? 
Does more current flow into a lightbulb than out of it? 
Explain.
	70.	Something gets “used up” in a battery that eventually 
dies and goes flat. One friend says that current is used 
up. Another friend says that energy is used up. Who, if 
either, do you agree with, and why?
	71.	Suppose you leave your car lights on while you see a 
movie. When you return, your battery is too “weak” to 
start your car. A friend gives you a jump-start with his bat-
tery and battery cables. What physics is occurring here?
	72.	Your friend says that, when jump-starting a dead battery, 
you should connect your live battery in parallel with the 
dead battery, which, in effect, replaces the dead one. Do 
you agree?
	73.	An electron moving in a wire collides repeatedly with 
atoms and travels an average distance between collisions 
called the mean free path. If the mean free path is less in 
some metals, what can you say about the resistance of 
these metals? For a given conductor, what can be done to 
lengthen the mean free path?
	74.	Why is the current in an incandescent bulb greater 
immediately after it is turned on than it is a few moments 
later? (That’s why bulbs usually burn out just as they are 
being turned on.)
	75.	Only a small percentage of the electric energy fed into a 
common lightbulb is transformed into light. What hap-
pens to the remaining energy?
	76.	Why are all compact fluorescent lamps more efficient 
than incandescent lamps?
	77.	Why are thick wires rather than thin wires usually used 
to carry large currents?
	78.	Why does the filament of a lightbulb glow but the con-
necting wires do not?
	79.	Will a lamp with a thick filament draw more current or 
less current than a lamp with a thin filament?
	80.	What causes electric shock: current or voltage?
	81.	If a current of one- or two-tenths of an ampere were to 
flow into one of your hands and out the other, you would 
probably be electrocuted. But if the same current were to 
flow into your hand and out the elbow above the same 
hand, you would survive even though the current might 
be large enough to burn your flesh. Explain.
	82.	Would you expect to find dc or ac in the filament 
of a lightbulb in your home? In the headlight of an 
automobile?
	83.	Are automobile headlights wired in parallel or in series? 
What is your evidence?
	84.	As more lines are opened at a fast-food restaurant, the 
resistance to the motion of people trying to get served is 
reduced. How is this similar to what happens when more 
branches are added to a parallel circuit?
	85.	What unit signifies (a) joule per coulomb, (b) coulomb 
per second, (c) watt?second?
	86.	Which is the same for a 10-V and a 20-V resistor in 
series in a series circuit: current or voltage?
	87.	Which is the same for a 10-V and a 20-V resistor in 
­parallel in a parallel circuit: current or voltage?
	88.	The damaging effects of electric shock result from the 
amount of current that flows in the body. Why, then, do 
we see signs that read “Danger—High Voltage” rather 
than “Danger—High Current”?
T h i n k  A n d  E x p l a i n  ( S Y N T H E S I S )
1
2
3
4
5


--- PDF page index 218 / textbook page 450 ---
450
Electricit y and Magnetism
part five
	 89.	Comment on the warning sign shown in the sketch.
	 90.	Is the following label on a household product cause for 
concern? “Caution: This product contains tiny, electri-
cally charged particles moving at speeds in excess of 
100,000,000 kilometers per hour.”
	 91.	Which will do less damage: plugging a 110-V hairdryer 
into a 220-V circuit or plugging a 220-V hairdryer into 
a 110-V circuit? Defend your answer.
	 92.	Why are the wingspans of birds a consideration in deter-
mining the spacing between parallel wires in a power 
line?
	 93.	Estimate the number of electrons that a power com-
pany delivers annually to the homes of a typical town 
of 40,000 people.
	 94.	If electrons flow very slowly through a circuit, why 
doesn’t it take a noticeably long time for a lamp to glow 
when you turn on a distant switch?
	 95.	Why is the speed of an electrical signal so much greater 
than the speed of sound?
	 96.	Consider a pair of flashlight bulbs connected to a bat-
tery. Will they glow brighter if they are connected in 
series or in parallel? Will the battery run down faster if 
the bulbs are connected in series or in parallel?
	 97.	What happens to the brightness of bulb A when the 
switch is closed and bulb B lights up?
	 98.	If several bulbs are connected in series to a battery, they 
may feel warm to the touch but not visibly glow. What is 
your explanation?
	 99.	In the circuit shown, how do the brightnesses of the 
identical lightbulbs compare? Which bulb draws the 
most current? What will happen if bulb A is unscrewed? 
If bulb C is unscrewed?
	100.	As more and more bulbs are connected in series to a 
flashlight battery, what happens to the brightness of each 
bulb? Assuming that heating inside the battery is negli-
gible, what happens to the brightness of each bulb when 
more and more bulbs are connected in parallel?
	101.	What changes occur in the line current when more 
devices are introduced in a series circuit? In a parallel 
circuit? Why are your answers different?
	102.	Why is there no effect on other branches in a paral-
lel circuit when one branch of the circuit is opened 
or closed?
	103.	When a pair of identical resistors are connected in series, 
which of the following is the same for both resistors:  
(a) voltage across each, (b) power dissipated in each,  
(c) current through each? Do any of your answers change 
if the resistors are different from each other?
	104.	When two identical resistors are connected in parallel, 
which of the following is the same for both resistors:  
(a) voltage across each, (b) power dissipated in each,  
(c) current through each? Do any of your answers change 
if the resistors are different from each other?
	105.	Batteries do have internal resistance, which is not always 
negligible. It shows when the current a battery supplies 
increases, whereupon the voltage it supplies decreases. 
Taking internal resistance of the battery into considera-
tion, will the brightness of many bulbs diminish when 
connected in parallel? Defend your answer.
	106.	Are these three circuits equivalent? Why or why not?
	107.	Figure 23.19 shows a fuse placed in a household cir-
cuit. In what other locations might a fuse be placed 
in this circuit to be useful, melting only if a problem 
arises?
A
B
A
B
C
