97
CHAPTER 6  Momentum
6.5 Conservation of Momentum
From Newton’s second law, you know that to accelerate an object, a net force must be applied to it. This chapter states much the same thing, but in different language. If you wish to change the momentum of an object, exert an impulse on it.

Only an impulse external to a system can change the momentum of the system. Internal forces and impulses won’t work. For example, the molecular forces within a baseball have no effect on the momentum of the baseball, just as a push against the dashboard of a car you’re sitting in does not affect the momentum of the car. Molecular forces within the baseball and a push on the dashboard are internal forces. They come in balanced pairs that cancel to zero within the object. To change the momentum of the ball or the car, an external push or pull is required. If no external force is present, then no external impulse is present, and no change in momentum is possible.

As another example, consider the cannon being fired in Figure 6.11. The force on the cannonball inside the cannon barrel is equal and opposite to the force that causes the cannon to recoil. Since these forces act for the same duration of time, the impulses are also equal and opposite. Recall Newton’s third law about equal and opposite action and reaction forces. It applies to impulses, too. These impulses are internal to the system comprising the cannon and the cannonball, so they don’t change the momentum of the cannon–cannonball system. Before the firing, the system is at rest and the momentum is zero. After the firing, the net momentum, or total momentum, is still zero. Net momentum is neither gained nor lost.

Margin note: Momentum is conserved for all collisions, both elastic and inelastic (whenever external forces don’t interfere).
Media link: SCREENCAST: Conservation of Momentum
Figure 6.11: The momentum before firing is zero. After firing, the net momentum is still zero because the momentum of the cannon is equal and opposite to the momentum of the cannonball. INTERACTIVE FIGURE
FYI: In Figure 6.11, most of the cannonball’s momentum is in speed; most of the recoiling cannon’s momentum is in mass. So mV = mv.

Momentum, like the quantities velocity and force, has both direction and magnitude. It is a vector quantity. Like velocity and force, momentum can be canceled. So, although the cannonball in the preceding example gains momentum when fired and the recoiling cannon gains momentum in the opposite direction, there is no gain in the cannon–cannonball system. The momenta (plural form of momentum) of the cannonball and the cannon are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction. Therefore, as vectors, they add to zero for the system as a whole. Since no net external force acts on the system, there is no net impulse on the system and no net change in momentum. You can see that, if no net force or net impulse acts on a system, the momentum of that system cannot change.

Footnote 2: Here we neglect the momentum of ejected gases from the exploding gunpowder, which can be considerable. Firing a gun with blanks at close range is a definite no-no because of the considerable momentum of ejecting gases. More than one person has been killed by close-range firing of blanks. In 1998, a minister in Jacksonville, Florida, dramatizing his sermon before several hundred parishioners, including his family, shot himself in the head with a blank round from a .357-caliber Magnum. Although no slug emerged from the gun, exhaust gases did—enough to be lethal. So, strictly speaking, the momentum of the bullet + the momentum of the exhaust gases is equal to the opposite momentum of the recoiling gun.

98
PART ONE  Mechanics
Margin note: Can you see how Newton’s laws relate to momentum conservation?
Figure 6.12: A cue ball hits an 8 ball head-on. Consider this event in three systems: (a) An external force acts on the 8-ball system, and its momentum increases. (b) An external force acts on the cue-ball system, and its momentum decreases. (c) No external force acts on the cue-ball + 8-ball system, and momentum is conserved (simply transferred from one part of the system to the other).

When momentum, or any quantity in physics, does not change, we say it is conserved. The idea that momentum is conserved when no external force acts is elevated to a central law of mechanics, called the law of conservation of momentum, which states:
In the absence of an external force, the momentum of a system remains unchanged.
In any system in which all forces are internal—as, for example, cars colliding, atomic nuclei undergoing radioactive decay, or stars exploding—the net momentum of the system before and after the event is the same.

Check Point
1. Newton’s second law states that, if no net force is exerted on a system, no acceleration occurs. Does it follow that no change in momentum occurs?
2. Newton’s third law states that the force a cannon exerts on a cannonball is equal and opposite to the force the cannonball exerts on the cannon. Does it follow that the impulse the cannon exerts on the cannonball is equal and opposite to the impulse the cannonball exerts on the cannon?

Check Your Answers
1. Yes, because no acceleration means that no change occurs in velocity or in momentum (mass × velocity). Another line of reasoning is simply that no net force means there is no net impulse and thus no change in momentum.
2. Yes, because the interaction between both occurs during the same time interval. Since the times are equal and the forces are equal and opposite, the impulses Ft are also equal and opposite. Impulse is a vector quantity and can be canceled.

Conservation Laws
A conservation law specifies that certain quantities in a system remain precisely constant, regardless of what changes may occur within the system. It is a law of constancy during change. In this chapter, we see that the total momentum is unchanged during collisions as long as no outside force acts during the collision. We say that momentum is conserved. In the next chapter, we’ll learn that energy is conserved as it transforms—the amount of energy in light, for example, transforms completely to thermal energy when the light is absorbed. We’ll see, in Chapter 8, that angular momentum is conserved—whatever the rotational motion of a planetary system, its angular momentum remains unchanged so long as it is free of outside influences. In Chapter 22, we’ll learn that electric charge is conserved, which means that it can be neither created nor destroyed. When we study nuclear physics, we’ll see that these and other conservation laws rule in the submicroscopic world. Conservation laws are a source of deep insights into the simple regularity of nature and are often considered the most fundamental physical laws. Can you think of things in your own life that remain constant as other things change?
