425
CHAPTER 22 
 
review
Electricity  A general term for electrical phenomena, much 
like gravity has to do with gravitational phenomena, or 
sociology with social phenomena.
Electrostatics  The study of electric charge at rest (not  
in motion, as in electric currents).
Conservation of charge  Electric charge is neither created 
nor destroyed. The total charge before an interaction 
equals the total charge after.
Coulomb’s law  The relationship among electrical force, 
charge, and distance:
F = k 
q1q2
d 2
If the charges are alike in sign, the force is repulsive; if 
the charges are unlike, the force is attractive.
Coulomb  The SI unit of electric charge. One coulomb 
(symbol C) is equal to the total charge of 6.25 3 1018 
electrons.
Conductor  Any material that has free charged particles that 
easily flow through it when an electrical force acts on 
them.
Insulator  A material that does not contain free charged par-
ticles and through which charge does not easily flow.
Semiconductor  A material with properties that fall between 
those of a conductor and an insulator and whose resis­
tance can be affected by adding impurities.
Superconductor  A material that is a perfect conductor with 
zero resistance to the flow of electric charge.
Charging by contact  The transfer of electric charges 
between objects by rubbing or simple touching.
Charging by induction  The redistribution of electric charg-
es in and on objects caused by the electrical influence of 
a charged object close by but not in contact.
Electrically polarized  The term applied to an atom or mol-
ecule in which the charges are aligned so that one side 
has a slight excess of positive charge and the other side a 
slight excess of negative charge.
Electric field  Electrical force per unit of charge. The field 
can be considered to be an “aura” surrounding charged 
objects and is a storehouse of electric energy. About a 
charged point, the field decreases with distance accord-
ing to the inverse-square law, like a gravitational field. 
Between oppositely charged parallel plates, the electric 
field is uniform:
Electric field = F
q
Electric potential energy  The energy a charged object pos-
sesses by virtue of its location in an electric field.
Electric potential  The electric potential energy per unit of 
charge, measured in volts; often called voltage:
Voltage =
electric potential energy
charge
Capacitor  An electrical device—in its simplest form, a 
pair of parallel conducting plates separated by a small 
distance—that stores electric charge and energy.
R e a d i n g  C h e c k  Q u e s t i o n s  ( C O M P R E H E N S I O N )
22.1 Electricity
	 1.	What term is used for “electricity at rest”?
	 2.	Why does the gravitational force between Earth and the 
Moon predominate over electrical forces?
22.2 Electric Charges
	 3.	Which part of an atom is positively charged, and which 
part is negatively charged?
	 4.	How does the charge of one electron compare with the 
charge of another electron? How does it compare with 
the charge of a proton?
	 5.	What is most commonly the net charge of an atom?
22.3 Conservation of Charge
	 6.	What is a positive ion? A negative ion?
	 7.	What is meant by conservation of charge?
	 8.	What is meant by saying that charge is quantized?
	 9.	Name one particle that has exactly one quantum unit 
of charge.
22.4 Coulomb’s Law
	10.	How does one coulomb of charge compare with the 
charge of a single electron?
	 11.	How is Coulomb’s law similar to Newton’s law of gravi-
tation? How is it different?
22.5 Conductors and Insulators
	12.	Why are metals good conductors both of heat and of 
electricity?
	13.	Why are materials such as glass and rubber good 
insulators?
	14.	How does a semiconductor differ from a conductor or an 
insulator?
	 15.	What is a transistor composed of, and what are some of 
its functions?
	16.	How does the flow of current differ in a superconductor 
compared with the flow in ordinary conductors?
22.6 Charging
	 17.	What happens to electrons in any charging process?
S u m m a r y  o f  T e r m s  ( K N O W L E D G E )
For instructor-assigned homework, go to www.masteringphysics.com 
