CHAPTER 22    Electrostatics

22.4 Coulomb's Law

The electrical force, like the gravitational force, decreases inversely as the square of the distance between charged bodies. This relationship, discovered by Charles Coulomb in the 18th century, is called Coulomb's law. It states that, for two charged objects that are much smaller than the distance between them, the force between the two objects varies directly as the product of their charges and inversely as the square of the separation distance. (Review the inverse-square law back in Figure 9.5.) The force acts along a straight line from one charged object to the other. Coulomb's law can be expressed as

F = k q1q2 / d^2

SCREENCAST: Coulomb's Law

Coulomb's law is like Newton's law of gravity. But, unlike gravity, electrical forces can be attractive or repulsive.

where d is the distance between the charged particles, q1 is the quantity of charge of one particle, q2 is the quantity of charge of the other particle, and k is the proportionality constant.

The SI unit of electric charge is the coulomb, abbreviated C. It turns out that 1 C is the charge associated with 6.25 billion billion electrons. This might seem like a huge number of electrons, but it represents only the amount of charge that flows in a common 100-watt lightbulb in a little over a second.

The proportionality constant k in Coulomb's law is similar to G in Newton's law of gravitation. Instead of being a very small number like G (6.67 x 10^-11), the electrical proportionality constant k is a very large number. It is approximately

9,000,000,000 N*m^2/C^2

or, in scientific notation, k = 9 x 10^9 N*m^2/C^2. The unit N*m^2/C^2 is not central to our interest here; it simply converts the right-hand side of the equation for Coulomb's law to the unit of force, the newton (N). What is important is the large magnitude of k. If, for example, a pair of like charged particles of 1 C each were 1 m apart, the force of repulsion between them would be 9 billion N.3 That would be more than 10 times the weight of a battleship! Obviously, such amounts of net charge do not exist in our everyday environment.

So Newton's law of gravitation for masses is similar to Coulomb's law for electrically charged bodies.4 The most important difference between gravitational and electrical forces is that electrical forces may be either attractive or repulsive, whereas gravitational forces are only attractive. Coulomb's law underlies the bonding forces between molecules that are essential in the field of chemistry.

Check Point
1. The proton that is the nucleus of the hydrogen atom attracts the electron that orbits it. Relative to this force, does the electron attract the proton with less force, with more force, or with the same amount of force?
2. If a proton at a particular distance from a charged particle is repelled with a given force, by how much will the force decrease when the proton is three times farther away from the particle? When it is five times farther away?
3. What is the sign of the charge of the particle in this case?

Check Your Answers
1. The same amount of force, in accord with Newton's third law--basic mechanics! Recall that a force is an interaction between two things--in this case, between the proton and the electron. They pull on each other equally.
2. It decreases to 1/9 its original value; to 1/25 its original value.
3. Positive.

3 Contrast this to the gravitational force of attraction between two 1-kg masses 1 m apart: 6.67 x 10^-11 N. This is an extremely small force. For the force to be 1 N, the masses at 1 m apart would have to be nearly 123,000 kg each! Gravitational forces between ordinary objects are exceedingly small, while electrical forces between ordinary objects can be exceedingly huge. We don't sense them because the positives and negatives normally balance out. Even for highly charged objects, the ratio of electrons to protons is normally less than one part in a trillion trillion.
4 According to quantum theory, a force that varies inversely as the square of the distance involves the exchange of particles with no mass. The exchange of massless photons is responsible for the electrical force, and the exchange of massless gravitons accounts for the gravitational force. Some scientists pursue an even deeper relationship between gravity and electricity. Albert Einstein spent the latter part of his life searching with little success for a "unified field theory." More recently, the electrical force has been unified with one of the two nuclear forces, the weak force, which plays a role in radioactive decay.
