20.4 Refraction of Sound

When sound waves continue through a medium and bend, they undergo refraction. Sound waves bend when parts of the wavefronts travel at different speeds. This may happen in uneven winds or when sound is traveling through air of uneven temperatures. On a warm day, the air near the ground may be appreciably warmer than the rest of the air, so the speed of sound near the ground increases (Figure 20.9). Sound waves therefore tend to bend away from the ground, resulting in sound that does not seem to travel well. Refraction of sound is caused by differences in the speed of sound.

We hear thunder when the lightning is reasonably close, but we often fail to hear the thunder for distant lightning because of refraction. The sound travels slower at higher altitudes and bends away from the ground, so you may not hear it. The opposite often occurs on a cold day or at night when the layer of air near the ground is colder than the air above. Then the speed of sound near the ground is reduced. The higher speed of the wavefronts above causes a bending of the sound toward the ground, resulting in sound that can be heard over considerably longer distances. Sound refraction explains why you can clearly hear conversations over a campfire far across a lake at night. Sound does not always travel in straight-line paths.

Figure 20.9 Sound waves are bent in air of uneven temperatures.

Note in Figure 20.9 that the directions of the sound waves (red) are at right angles to the wavefronts (blue).

The refraction of sound occurs under water, where the speed of sound varies with temperature. This poses a problem for surface vessels that bounce high-frequency waves off the bottom of the ocean to chart the sea bottom’s features. Refraction is a blessing for submarines trying to escape detection. Because of thermal gradients and layers of water at different temperatures, the refraction of sound leaves gaps or “blind spots” in the water. This is where submarines hide. If it weren’t for refraction, submarines would be easier to detect.

Sound composed of frequencies higher than the range of human hearing is ultrasound. Physicians use the multiple reflections and refractions of ultrasonic waves in a technique that harmlessly views the inside of the body without the use of X-rays. When ultrasound enters the body, it is reflected more strongly from the outside of an organ than from its interior, and an image of the outline of the organ is obtained. When ultrasound is incident upon a moving object, the reflected sound has a slightly different frequency. Using this Doppler effect, a physician can “see” the beating heart of a fetus as early as 11 weeks after conception (Figure 20.10).

Figure 20.10 A human fetus is clearly displayed on a viewing screen by ultrasound.

Ultrasound is used in medicine to produce images of internal body organs and babies in the womb and in industry to detect flaws in metal. Although the ultrasound echo technique may be relatively new to humans, it is old stuff to creatures such as bats and dolphins. Bats, for example, emit ultrasonic squeaks and locate objects by their echoes. Dolphins do this and more. Whereas sound is a passive sense for us, it is an active sense for the dolphin, which sends out sounds and then perceives its surroundings on the basis of their echoes. Sensing ultrasonic waves enables a dolphin to “see” through the bodies of other animals and people. Skin, muscle, and fat are almost transparent to dolphins, so they “see” only a thin outline of the body—but the bones, teeth, and gas-filled cavities are clearly apparent. Physical evidence of cancers, tumors, heart attacks, and even emotional state can all be “seen” by the dolphin3 —as humans have only recently been able to accomplish with ultrasound.

Figure 20.11 A dolphin emits ultra-high-frequency sound to locate and identify objects in its environment. Distance is sensed by the time delay between sending sound and receiving its echo, and direction is sensed by differences in time for the echo to reach its two ears. A dolphin’s main diet is fish, and since hearing in fish is limited to fairly low frequencies, the fish are not alerted to the fact that they are being hunted.

Check Point
An oceanic depth-sounding vessel surveys the ocean bottom with ultrasonic sound that travels at an average of 1530 m/s in seawater. How deep is the water if the time delay of the echo from the ocean floor is 2 s?

Check Your Answer
1530 m (1 s down and 1 s up).

3 The primary sense of the dolphin is acoustic because vision is not a very useful sense in the often murky and dark depths of the ocean. What’s more interesting, the dolphin can reproduce the sonic signals that paint the mental image of its surroundings; thus the dolphin probably communicates its experience to other dolphins by communicating the full acoustic image of what is “seen,” placing it directly in the minds of other dolphins. A dolphin needs no word or symbol for “fish,” for example, but communicates an image of the real thing—perhaps with emphasis highlighted by selective filtering, as we similarly communicate a musical concert to others via various means of sound reproduction. Small wonder that the language of the dolphin is unlike our own!
