C h a p t e r 3     L i n e a r M o t i o n   51

3.6      Velocity Vectors
Whereas speed is a measure of “how fast,” velocity is a measure of both “how fast”
and “in which direction.” If the speedometer in a car reads 100 kilometers per hour
(km/h), you know your speed. If there is also a compass on the dashboard, indicat-
ing that the car is moving due north, for example, you know your velocity—100                SCREENCAST: Velocity Vectors
km/h north. To know your velocity is to know your speed and your direction.
Speed is a scalar quantity and velocity is a vector quantity.
   Consider an airplane flying due north at 80 km/h relative to the surrounding
air. Suppose that the plane is caught in a 60-km/h crosswind (wind blowing at a
right angle to the direction of the airplane) that blows it off its intended course.
This example is represented with vectors in Figure 3.12, with velocity vectors
scaled so that 1 centimeter (cm) represents 20 km/h. Thus, the 80-km/h veloc-
ity of the airplane is shown by the 4-cm vector, and the 60-km/h crosswind is
shown by the 3-cm vector. The diagonal of the constructed parallelogram (a rec-
tangle, in this case) measures 5 cm, which represents 100 km/h. So the airplane
moves at 100 km/h relative to the ground in a direction rotated 37° eastward
from due north.

F i g u r e 3 .1 2
The 60-km/h crosswind blows the 80-km/h airplane off course at 100 km/h.

The pair of 6-unit and 8-unit vec-
tors at right angles to each other
say, “We may be a six and an eight,
but together we’re a perfect ten.”

Check Point
Consider a motorboat that normally travels at 10 km/h in still water. If the
boat heads directly across the river, which also flows at a rate of 10 km/h,
what will be its velocity relative to the shore?

Check Your Answer
When the boat heads cross-stream (at a right angle to the river flow), its
velocity is 14.1 km/h, 45° downstream. Recall from Chapter 2 that the paral-
lelogram formed by a pair of equal-length vectors at right angles to each
other is a square that has a diagonal 12 times the length of each side (see
Figure 2.9).

Please remember that it took people nearly 2000 years from the time of Aristotle
to reach a clear understanding of motion, so be patient with yourself if you find
that you require a few hours to achieve as much!
