3
B
eing second best was not all that bad for Greek
mathematician Eratosthenes of Cyrene (276–194
bc). He was nicknamed “beta” by his contem-
poraries who judged him second best in many fields,
including mathematics, philosophy, athletics, and
astronomy. Perhaps he took second prizes in running
or wrestling contests. He was one of the early librar-
ians at the world’s then-greatest library, the Mouseion,
in Alexandria, Egypt, founded by Ptolemy II Soter.
Eratosthenes was one of the foremost scholars of his
time and wrote on philosophical, scientific, and liter-
ary matters. His reputation among his contemporaries
was immense—Archimedes dedicated a book to him.
As a mathematician, he invented a method for finding
prime numbers. As a geographer, he measured the tilt of
Earth’s axis with great accuracy and wrote Geography,
the first book to give geography a mathematical basis
and to treat Earth as a globe divided by latitudes and
into frigid, temperate, and torrid zones.
The classical works of Greek literature were preserved
at the Mouseion, which was host to numerous scholars
and contained hundreds of thousands of papyrus and
vellum scrolls. But this human treasure wasn’t appreciated
by everybody. Much infor-
mation in the Mouseion
conflicted with cherished
beliefs held by others.
Threatened by its “her-
esies,” the great library was
burned and completely
destroyed. Historians are
unsure of the culprits, who
were likely guided by the
certainty of their truths.
Being absolutely certain,
having absolutely no doubts, is certitude—the root
cause of much of the destruction, human and oth-
erwise, in the centuries that followed. Eratosthenes
didn’t witness the destruction of his great library, for it
occurred after his lifetime.
Today Eratosthenes is most remembered for his amaz-
ing calculation of Earth’s size, with remarkable accu­
racy
(2000 years ago with no computers and no artificial
satellites—using only good thinking, geometry, and
simple measurements). In this chapter you will see how
he accomplished this.
1.1 Scientific Measurements
Measurements are a hallmark of good science. How much you know about
something is often related to how well you can measure it. This was well put
by the famous physicist Lord Kelvin in the 19th century: “I often say that when
you can measure something and express it in numbers, you know something
about it. When you cannot measure it, when you cannot express it in numbers,
your knowledge is of a meager and unsatisfactory kind. It may be the beginning
of knowledge, but you have scarcely in your thoughts advanced to the stage of
science, whatever it may be.” Scientific measurements are not something new
but go back to ancient times. In the 3rd century bc, for example, fairly accurate
measurements were made of the sizes of the Earth, Moon, and Sun, and the
distances between them.
How Eratosthenes Measured the Size of Earth
The size of Earth was first measured in Egypt by Eratosthenes in about 235 bc.
He calculated the circumference of Earth in the following way. He knew that the
Sun is highest in the sky at noon on the day of the summer solstice (which occurs
around June 21 on today’s calendars). At this time, a vertical stick casts its short-
est shadow. If the Sun is directly overhead, a vertical stick casts no shadow at all.
Eratosthenes learned from library information that the Sun was directly overhead
at noon on the day of the summer solstice in Syene, a city south of Alexandria
(where the Aswan Dam stands today). At this particular time, sunlight shines
directly down a deep well in Syene and is reflected back up again. Eratosthenes
reasoned that, if the Sun’s rays were extended into Earth at this point, they would
pass through the center. Likewise, a vertical line extended into Earth at Alexandria
(or anywhere else) would also pass through Earth’s center.
3
CHAPTER 1   About Science
4 CHAPTER 1   About Science
At noon on June 22, Eratosthenes measured the shadow cast by a vertical pil-
lar in Alexandria and found it to be 1/8 the height of the pillar (Figure 1.1). This
corresponds to a 7.1° angle between the Sun’s rays and the vertical pillar. Since
7.1° is 7.1/360, or about 1/50 of a circle, Eratosthenes reasoned that the distance
between Alexandria and Syene must be 1/50 the circumference of Earth. Thus the
circumference of Earth becomes 50 times the distance between these two cities.
This distance, quite flat and frequently traveled, was measured by surveyors to be
about 5000 stadia (800 kilometers). So Eratosthenes calculated Earth’s circumfer-
ence to be 50 * 5000 stadia = 250,000 stadia. This is very close to the currently
accepted value of Earth’s circumference.
We get the same result by bypassing degrees altogether and comparing the
length of the shadow cast by the pillar to the height of the pillar. Geometrical rea-
soning shows, to a close approximation, that the ratio shadow length/pillar height is
the same as the ratio distance between Alexandria and Syene/Earth’s radius. So, just
as the pillar is 8 times taller than its shadow, the radius of Earth must be 8 times
greater than the distance between Alexandria and Syene.
Since the circumference of a circle is 2p times its radius (C = 2pr), Earth’s
radius is simply its circumference divided by 2p. In modern units, Earth’s radius
is 6370 kilometers and its circumference is 40,000 km.
Size of the Moon
Another Greek scientist of the same era was Aristarchus, who was likely the first to
suggest that Earth spins on its axis once a day, which accounted for the daily mo-
tion of the stars. He also hypothesized that Earth moves around the Sun in a yearly
orbit and that the other planets do likewise.1
Aristarchus correctly calculated the
Moon’s diameter and its distance from Earth. He accomplished all this in about
240 bc, seventeen centuries before his findings were fully accepted.
Science is the body of knowledge
that describes the order within
nature and the causes of that
order. Science is also an ongoing
human activity that represents the
collective efforts, findings, and
wisdom of the human race, an
activity that is dedicated to
gathering knowledge about the
world and organizing and con-
densing it into testable laws and
theories. Science had its begin-
nings before recorded history,
when people first discovered regu-
larities and relationships in nature,
such as star patterns in the night
sky and weather patterns—when
the rainy season started or when
the days grew longer. From these
regularities, people learned
to make predictions that gave
them some control over their
surroundings.
Science made great headway in
Greece in the 4th and 3rd centuries
bc, and spread throughout the
Mediterranean world. Scientific
advance came to a near halt in
Europe when the Roman Empire
fell in the 5th century ad. Barbarian
hordes destroyed almost every-
thing in their paths as they overran
Europe. Reason gave way to reli-
gion, which plunged Europe into
the Dark Ages. During this time,
the Chinese and Polynesians were
charting the stars and the planets
and Arab nations were developing
mathematics and learning about
the production of glass, paper,
metals, and various chemicals.
Greek science was re-introduced
to Europe by Islamic influences
that penetrated into Spain during
the 10th, 11th, and 12th centuries.
Universities emerged in Europe in
the 13th century, and the introduc-
tion of gunpowder changed the
social and political structure of
Europe in the 14th century. In the
15th century art and science were
beautifully blended by Leonardo
da Vinci. Scientific thought was
furthered in the 16th century with
the advent of the printing press.
F i g u r e 1 .1
When the Sun is directly overhead at Syene, it is not directly overhead in Alexandria, 800
km north. When the Sun’s rays shine directly down a vertical well in Syene, they cast a
shadow of a vertical pillar in Alexandria. The verticals at both locations extend to the
center of Earth, and they make the same angle that the Sun’s rays make with the pillar at
Alexandria. Eratosthenes measured this angle to be 1/50 of a complete circle. Therefore,
the distance between Alexandria and Syene is 1/50 Earth’s circumference.
N
Shadow Vertical at Alexandria
Practically parallel sunbeams
Vertical well
Vertical
Alexandria
Syene
7.1°
7.1°
S
pillar
1
Aristarchus was unsure of his heliocentric hypothesis, likely because Earth’s unequal seasons seemed not to
support the idea that Earth circles the Sun. More important, it was noted that the Moon’s distance from Earth
varies—clear evidence that the Moon does not perfectly circle Earth. If the Moon does not follow a circular
path about Earth, it was hard to argue that Earth follows a circular path about the Sun. The explanation,
the elliptical paths of planets, was not discovered until centuries later by Johannes Kepler. In the meantime,
epicycles proposed by other astronomers accounted for these discrepancies. It is interesting to speculate about
the course of astronomy if the Moon didn’t exist. Its irregular orbit would not have contributed to the early
discrediting of the heliocentric theory, which might have taken hold centuries earlier.
5
CHAPTER 1   About Science
Aristarchus compared the size of the Moon with the size of Earth by watch-
ing an eclipse of the Moon. Earth, like any body in sunlight, casts a shadow. An
eclipse of the Moon is simply the event in which the Moon passes into this shad-
ow. Aristarchus carefully studied this event and found that the width of Earth’s
shadow out at the Moon was 2.5 Moon diameters. This would seem to indicate
that the Moon’s diameter is 2.5 times smaller than Earth’s. But, because of the
huge size of the Sun, Earth’s shadow tapers, as evidenced during a solar eclipse.
(Figure 1.2 shows this in exaggerated scale.) At that time, Earth intercepts the
Moon’s shadow—but just barely. The Moon’s shadow tapers almost to a point at
Earth’s surface, evidence that the taper of the Moon’s shadow at this distance is
1 Moon diameter. So during a lunar eclipse Earth’s shadow, covering the same
distance, must also taper 1 Moon diameter. If the tapering of the Sun’s rays is
taken into account, Earth’s diameter must be (2.5 + 1) times the Moon’s diameter.
In this way, Aristarchus showed that the Moon’s diameter is 1/3.5 that of Earth’s.
The presently accepted diameter of the Moon is 3640 km, within 5% of the value
calculated by Aristarchus.
The 16th-century Polish astrono-
mer Nicolaus Copernicus caused
great controversy when he
published a book proposing that
the Sun is stationary and that
Earth revolves around the Sun.
These ideas conflicted with the
popular view that Earth was the
center of the universe. They also
conflicted with Church teachings
and were banned for 200 years.
The Italian physicist Galileo Galilei
was arrested for popularizing the
Copernican theory and for some
astronomical discoveries of his
own. Yet, a century later, the ideas
of Copernicus and Galileo were
generally accepted.
This kind of cycle happens age
after age. In the early 1800s, ge-
ologists met with violent condem-
nation because they differed with
the Genesis account of creation.
Later in the same century, geology
was accepted, but theories of evo-
lution were condemned and the
teaching of them was forbidden.
Every age has its groups of intel-
lectual rebels who are condemned
and sometimes persecuted at the
time but who later seem harm-
less and often essential to the
elevation of human conditions.
As Count M. Maeterlinck wisely
said, “At every crossway on the
road that leads to the future, each
progressive spirit is opposed by a
thousand men appointed to guard
the past.”
F i g u r e 1 . 2
During a lunar eclipse, Earth’s
shadow is observed to be 2.5 times as
wide as the Moon’s diameter. Because
of the Sun’s large size, Earth’s shadow
must taper. The amount of taper is
evident during a solar eclipse, where
the Moon’s shadow tapers a whole
Moon diameter from Moon to Earth.
So Earth’s shadow tapers the same
amount in the same distance. There-
fore, Earth’s diameter must be 3.5
Moon diameters.
Light rays from
Moon’s orbit
Moon during
solar eclipse
Moon’s shadow
tapers 1 Moon diameter
Earth
Earth’s shadow is 2.5 times
wider than Moon
Moon during
lunar eclipse
Light rays from
upper edge of Sun
lower edge of Sun
F i g u r e 1 . 3
Correct scale of solar and lunar eclipses, which shows why a perfect lineup of the Sun,
Moon, and Earth is rare. (Eclipses are even rarer because the Moon’s orbit is tilted about 5°
from the plane of Earth’s orbit about the Sun.)
Sun Moon’s orbit
Earth
(too small to see)
Distance to the Moon
Tape a small coin, such as a dime, to a window and view it with one eye so that it just
blocks out the full Moon. This occurs when your eye is about 110 coin diameters
away from the coin. Then the ratio coin diameter/coin distance is about 1/110. Geo-
metrical reasoning from similar triangles shows this is also the ratio Moon diameter/
Moon distance (Figure 1.4). So the distance from you to the Moon is 110 times the
Moon’s diameter. The early Greeks knew this. Aristarchus’s measurement of the
Moon’s diameter was all that was needed to calculate the Earth–Moon distance. So
the early Greeks knew both the size of the Moon and its distance from Earth.
With this information, Aristarchus calculated the Earth–Sun distance.
6 CHAPTER 1   About Science
Distance to the Sun
If you were to repeat the coin-and-Moon exercise for the Sun (which would be
dangerous to do because of the Sun’s brightness), guess what? The ratio Sun diam-
eter/Sun distance is also 1/110. This is because the sizes of the Sun and Moon are
both the same to the eye. They both taper the same angle (about 0.5°). However,
although the ratio of diameter to distance was known to the early Greeks, diam-
eter alone or distance alone would have to be determined by some other means.
Aristarchus found a method for doing this. Here’s what he did.
Aristarchus watched for the phase of the Moon when it was exactly half full,
with the Sun still visible in the sky. Then the sunlight must be falling on the Moon
at right angles to his line of sight. This meant that the lines between Earth and the
Moon, between Earth and the Sun, and between the Moon and the Sun form a
right triangle (Figure 1.5).
A rule of trigonometry states that, if you know all the angles in a right triangle
plus the length of any one of its sides, you can calculate the length of any other
side. Aristarchus knew the distance from Earth to the Moon. At the time of the
half Moon he also knew one of the angles, 90°. All he had to do was measure
the second angle between the line of sight to the Moon and the line of sight to the
Sun. Then the third angle, a very small one, is 180° minus the sum of the first two
angles (the sum of the angles in any triangle 5 180°).
Measuring the angle between the lines of sight to the Moon and Sun is difficult to
do without a modern transit. For one thing, both the Sun and Moon are not points,
but are relatively big. Aristarchus had to sight on their centers (or either edge) and
measure the angle between—quite large, almost a right angle itself! By modern-day
F i g u r e 1 . 4
An exercise in ratios: When the coin barely “eclipses” the Moon, the ratio of the diameter
of the coin to the distance between you and the coin is equal to the ratio of the diameter
of the Moon to the distance between you and the Moon (not to scale here). Measurements
give a value of 1/110 for both ratios.
Diameter of coin
Diameter of Moon
Distance to coin
Distance to Moon
Coin diameter
Coin distance
Moon diameter
Moon distance
1
=
=
110
F i g u r e 1 . 5
When the Moon appears exactly half full, the Sun, Moon, and Earth form a right triangle
(not to scale). The hypotenuse is the Earth–Sun distance. By simple trigonometry, the
hypotenuse of a right triangle can be found if you know the size of either nonright angle
and the length of one side. The Earth–Moon distance is a side of known length. Measure
angle X and you can calculate the Earth–Sun distance.
Sun
Half Moon
Earth
90°
X
The Sun is directly overhead at
noon only near the equator. Stand-
ing in the sunshine at the equator,
you cast no shadow. At locations
farther from the equator, the Sun
is never directly overhead at noon.
The farther you stand from the
equator, the longer is the shadow
your body casts.
SCREENCAST: Pinhole Images
7
CHAPTER 1   About Science
standards, his measurement was very crude. He measured 87°, while the true value
is 89.8°. He figured the Sun to be about 20 times farther away than the Moon, when
in fact it is about 400 times as distant. So, although his method was ingenious, his
measurements were crude. Perhaps Aristarchus found it difficult to believe the Sun
was so far away, and he erred on the nearer side. We don’t know.
Today we know the Sun is an average of 150,000,000 kilometers from Earth. It
is somewhat closer to Earth in December (147,000,000 km) and somewhat farther
away in June (152,000,000 km).
Size of the Sun
Once the distance to the Sun is known, the 1/110 ratio of diameter/distance enables a
measurement of the Sun’s diameter. Another way to measure the 1/110 ratio, besides
the method of Figure 1.4, is to measure the diameter of the Sun’s image cast through a
pinhole opening. You should try this. Poke a hole in a sheet of opaque cardboard and
let sunlight shine on it. The round image that is cast on a surface below is actually an
image of the Sun. You’ll see that the size of the image does not depend on the size of
the pinhole but, rather, on how far away the pinhole is from the image. Bigger holes
make brighter images, not bigger ones. Of course, if the hole is very big, no image is
formed. Careful measurement will show that the ratio of image size to pinhole distance
is 1/110—the same as the ratio Sun diameter/Sun–Earth distance (Figure 1.6).
Interestingly, at the time of a partial solar eclipse, the image cast by the pinhole
will be a crescent shape—the same as that of the partially covered Sun. This pro-
vides an alternate way to view a partial eclipse without looking at the Sun.
Have you noticed that the spots of sunlight you see on the ground beneath trees are
perfectly round when the Sun is overhead and spread into ellipses when the Sun is low
in the sky? These are pinhole images of the Sun, where sunlight shines through open-
ings in the leaves that are small compared with the distance to the ground below. A
round spot 10 centimeters in diameter is cast by an opening that is 110 3 10 cm above
ground. Tall trees make large images; short trees make small images. And, at the time
of a partial solar eclipse, the images are crescents (Figure 1.7).
F i g u r e 1 . 6
The round spot of light cast by the
pinhole is an image of the Sun. Its
diameter/distance ratio is the same as
the Sun diameter/Sun–Earth distance
ratio, 1/110. The Sun’s diameter is
1/110 its distance from Earth.
d
150,000,000 km
1
5
0
,0
0
0
,0
0
0
k
m
110
=
=
1
d D
h
h
D
F i g u r e 1 . 8
Renoir accurately painted the spots of sunlight on his subjects’ clothing and surround-
ings—images of the Sun cast by relatively small openings in the leaves above.
F i g u r e 1 . 7
The crescent-shaped spots of sunlight
are images of the Sun when it is
partially eclipsed.
8 CHAPTER 1   About Science
Mathematics—The Language of Science
Science and human conditions advanced dramatically after the integration of sci-
ence and mathematics some four centuries ago. When the ideas of science are
expressed in mathematical terms, they are unambiguous. The equations of science
provide compact expressions of relationships between concepts. They don’t have
the multiple meanings that so often confuse the discussion of ideas expressed in
common language. When findings in nature are expressed mathematically, they
are easier to verify or to disprove by experiment. The mathematical structure of
physics will be evident in the many equations you will encounter throughout this
book. The equations are guides to thinking that show the connections between
concepts in nature. The methods of mathematics and experimentation led to enor-
mous success in science.2
1.2 Scientific Methods
There is no one scientific method. But there are common features in the way
scientists do their work, dating back to the Italian physicist Galileo Galilei
(1564–1642) and the English philosopher Francis Bacon (1561–1626). They
broke free from the methods of the Greeks, who worked “upward or downward,”
depending on the circumstances, reaching conclusions about the physical world
by reasoning from arbitrary assumptions (axioms). The modern scientist works
“upward,” first examining the way the world actually works and then building a
structure to explain the findings.
Although no cookbook description of the scientific method is really adequate,
some or all of the following steps are likely to be found in the way most scientists
carry out their work.
1. Recognize a question or a puzzle—such as an unexplained fact.
2. Make an educated guess—a hypothesis—that might resolve the puzzle.
3. Predict consequences of the hypothesis.
4. Perform experiments or make calculations to test the predictions.
5. Formulate the simplest general rule that organizes the three main ingredients:
hypothesis, predicted effects, and experimental findings.
Although these steps are appealing, much progress in science has come from
trial and error, experimentation without hypotheses, or just plain accidental dis-
covery by a well-prepared mind. The success of science rests more on an attitude
common to scientists than on a particular method. This scientific attitude is one
of inquiry, integrity, and humility—that is, a willingness to admit error.
The Scientific Attitude
It is common to think of a fact as something that is unchanging and absolute. But,
in science, a fact is generally a close agreement by competent observers who make
a series of observations about the same phenomenon. For example, although it was
once a fact that the universe is unchanging and permanent, today it is a fact that
the universe is expanding and evolving. A scientific hypothesis, on the other hand,
is an educated guess that is only presumed to be factual until supported by experi-
ment. When a hypothesis has been tested over and over again and has not been
contradicted, it may become known as a law or principle.
2
We distinguish between the mathematical structure of physics and the practice of mathematical problem
solving—the focus of most nonconceptual courses. Note the relatively small number of problems at the ends
of the chapters in this book, compared with the number of exercises. The focus is on comprehension comfort-
ably before computation. Additional problems are in the Problem Solving in Conceptual Physics ancillary book.
Science is a way of knowing about
the world and making sense of it.
