Chapter 26: Properties of Light
Section 26.4: Transparent Materials

When light is transmitted through matter, some of the electrons in the matter are forced into vibration. In this way, vibrations in the emitter are transmitted to vibrations in the receiver. This is similar to the way sound is transmitted (Figure 26.6).

Figure 26.6
Just as a sound wave can force a sound receiver into vibration, a light wave can force electrons in materials into vibration.

The way a receiving material responds when light is incident on it depends on the frequency of the light and on the natural frequency of the electrons in the material. Visible light vibrates at a very high frequency, more than 100 trillion times per second (more than 10^14 Hz). If a charged object is to respond to these ultrafast vibrations, it must have very, very little inertia. Because the mass of electrons is so tiny, they can vibrate at this rate.

Atoms are like optical tuning forks that resonate at certain frequencies.

Such materials as glass and water allow light to pass through in straight lines. We say they are transparent to light. To understand how light travels through a transparent material, visualize the electrons in the atoms of transparent materials as if they were connected to the nucleus by springs (Figure 26.7). When a light wave is incident upon them, the electrons are set into vibration.

Figure 26.7
The spring model of light. The electrons of atoms in glass have certain natural frequencies of vibration and behave as if they were connected to the atomic nucleus by springs.

Materials that are springy (elastic) respond more to vibrations at some frequencies than at others (see Chapter 20). Bells ring at a particular frequency, tuning forks vibrate at a particular frequency, and so do the electrons of atoms and molecules. The natural vibration frequencies of an electron depend on how strongly it is attached to its atom or molecule. Different atoms and molecules have different "spring strengths." Electrons in the atoms of glass have a natural vibration frequency in the ultraviolet range. Therefore, when ultraviolet waves shine on glass, resonance occurs and the vibration of electrons builds up to large amplitudes, just as pushing someone at the resonant frequency on a swing builds to a large amplitude. The energy received by any glass atom is either reemitted or passed on to neighboring atoms by collisions. Resonating atoms in the glass can hold onto the energy of the ultraviolet light for quite a long time (about 100 millionths of a second). During this time, the atom makes more than 1 million vibrations, and it collides with neighboring atoms and gives up its energy as heat. Thus, glass is not transparent to ultraviolet light.

video: Light and Transparent Materials

At lower wave frequencies, such as those of visible light, electrons in the glass atoms are forced into vibration, but at lower amplitudes. The atoms hold the energy for a shorter time, with less chance of collision with neighboring atoms, and with less energy transformed into heat. The energy of vibrating electrons is reemitted as light. Glass is transparent to all the frequencies of visible light. The frequency of the reemitted light that is passed from atom to atom is identical to the frequency of the light that produced the vibration in the first place. However, there is a slight time delay between absorption and reemission. It is this time delay that results in a lower average speed of light through a transparent material (Figure 26.8).

Different materials have different molecular structures and therefore absorb or reflect light from various spectral ranges differently.

Figure 26.8
A wave of visible light incident on a pane of glass sets up vibrations in the glass atoms that produce a chain of absorptions and reemissions, which pass the light energy through the material and out the other side. Because of the time delay between absorptions and reemissions, the light travels more slowly through the glass than through empty space.

Figure 26.9
When the raised ball is released and hits the others, the ball that emerges at the opposite side is not the ball that initiates the transfer of energy. Likewise, light that emerges from a pane of glass is not the same light that was incident on the glass.

Light travels at different average speeds through different materials. We say average speeds because the speed of light in a vacuum, whether in interstellar space or in the space between molecules in a piece of glass, is a constant 300,000 km/s. We call this speed of light c. The speed of light in the atmosphere is slightly less than in a vacuum, but it is usually rounded off as c. In water, light travels at 75% of its speed in a vacuum, or 0.75c. In glass, light travels at about 0.67c, depending on the type of glass. In a diamond, light travels at less than half its speed in a vacuum, only 0.41c. When light emerges from these materials into the air, it travels at its original speed, c.

In glass, infrared waves, with frequencies lower than those of visible light, cause not only the electrons but entire atoms or molecules to vibrate. This vibration increases the internal energy and temperature of the structure, which is why infrared waves are often called heat waves. So we see that glass is transparent to visible light, but not to ultraviolet and infrared light.

Figure 26.10
Glass blocks both infrared and ultraviolet light, but it is transparent to visible light.

Light slows when it enters glass?

Check Point
1. Why is glass transparent to visible light but opaque to ultraviolet and infrared?
2. Pretend that, while walking across a conference room, you make several momentary stops along the way to greet people who are "on your wavelength." How is this analogous to light traveling through glass?
3. In what way isn't it analogous?

Check Your Answers
1. Because the natural vibration frequency for electrons in glass is the same as the frequency of ultraviolet light, resonance occurs when ultraviolet waves shine on glass. The absorbed energy is passed on to other atoms as heat, not reemitted as light, making the glass opaque at ultraviolet frequencies. In the range of visible light, the forced vibrations of electrons in the glass are at smaller amplitudes--vibrations are more subtle, reemission of light (rather than the generation of heat) occurs, and the glass is transparent. Lower-frequency infrared light causes whole molecules, rather than electrons, to resonate; again, heat is generated and the glass is opaque to infrared light.
2. Your average speed across the room is less than it would be in an empty room because of the time delays associated with your momentary stops. Likewise, the speed of light in glass is less than in air because of the time delays caused by the light's interactions with atoms along its path.
3. In walking across the room, it is you who begin and complete the walk. This is not analogous to light traveling through glass because, according to our model for light passing through a transparent material, the light absorbed by the first electron that is made to vibrate is not the same light that is reemitted--even though the two, like identical twins, are indistinguishable.

Footnote 4: Electrons, of course, are not really connected by springs. Their "vibration" is actually orbital as they move around the nucleus, but the "spring model" helps us to understand the interaction of light with matter. Physicists devise such conceptual models to understand nature, particularly at the submicroscopic level. The worth of a model lies not in whether it is "true," but in whether it is useful. A good model not only is consistent with and explains observations but also predicts what may happen. If predictions of the model are contrary to what happens, then the model is usually either refined or abandoned. The simplified model that we present here--of an atom whose electrons vibrate as if on springs, with a time interval between absorbing energy and reemitting energy--is quite useful for understanding how light passes through transparent solids.

Footnote 5: The presently accepted value is 299,792 km/s, rounded to 300,000 km/s. (This corresponds to 186,000 mi/s.)
