1.2

Science is a way of knowing about
the world and making sense of it.

Scientific Methods

There is no one scientific method. But there are common features in the way
scientists do their work, dating back to the Italian physicist Galileo Galilei
(1564–1642) and the English philosopher Francis Bacon (1561–1626). They
broke free from the methods of the Greeks, who worked “upward or downward,”
depending on the circumstances, reaching conclusions about the physical world
by reasoning from arbitrary assumptions (axioms). The modern scientist works
“upward,” first examining the way the world actually works and then building a
structure to explain the findings.
Although no cookbook description of the scientific method is really adequate,
some or all of the following steps are likely to be found in the way most scientists
carry out their work.
1. Recognize a question or a puzzle—such as an unexplained fact.
2. Make an educated guess—a hypothesis —that might resolve the puzzle.
3. Predict consequences of the hypothesis.
4. Perform experiments or make calculations to test the predictions.
5. Formulate the simplest general rule that organizes the three main ingredients:
hypothesis, predicted effects, and experimental findings.
Although these steps are appealing, much progress in science has come from
trial and error, experimentation without hypotheses, or just plain accidental discovery by a well-prepared mind. The success of science rests more on an attitude
common to scientists than on a particular method. This scientific attitude is one
of inquiry, integrity, and humility—that is, a willingness to admit error.

The Scientific Attitude

It is common to think of a fact as something that is unchanging and absolute. But,
in science, a fact is generally a close agreement by competent observers who make
a series of observations about the same phenomenon. For example, although it was
once a fact that the universe is unchanging and permanent, today it is a fact that
the universe is expanding and evolving. A scientific hypothesis, on the other hand,
is an educated guess that is only presumed to be factual until supported by experiment. When a hypothesis has been tested over and over again and has not been
contradicted, it may become known as a law or principle.
We distinguish between the mathematical structure of physics and the practice of mathematical problem
solving—the focus of most nonconceptual courses. Note the relatively small number of problems at the ends
of the chapters in this book, compared with the number of exercises. The focus is on comprehension comfortably before computation. Additional problems are in the Problem Solving in Conceptual Physics ancillary book.

2

C H A P T E R 1    A b o u t S ci e n ce

If a scientist finds evidence that contradicts a hypothesis, law, or principle, then,
in the scientific spirit, it must be changed or abandoned—regardless of the reputation or authority of the persons advocating it (unless the contradicting evidence,
upon testing, turns out to be wrong—which sometimes happens). For example,
the greatly respected Greek philosopher Aristotle (384–322 bc) claimed that an
object falls at a speed proportional to its weight. This idea was held to be true for
nearly 2000 years because of Aristotle’s compelling authority. Galileo allegedly
showed the falseness of Aristotle’s claim with one experiment—demonstrating that
heavy and light objects dropped from the Leaning Tower of Pisa fell at nearly
equal speeds. In the scientific spirit, a single verifiable experiment to the contrary
outweighs any authority, regardless of reputation or the number of followers or
advocates. In modern science, argument by appeal to authority has little value.3
Scientists must accept their experimental findings even when they would like
them to be different. They must strive to distinguish between what they see and
what they wish to see, for scientists, like most people, have a vast capacity for fooling
themselves.4 People have always tended to adopt general rules, beliefs, creeds, ideas,
and hypotheses without thoroughly questioning their validity and to retain them
long after they have been shown to be meaningless, false, or at least questionable.
The most widespread assumptions are often the least questioned. Most often, when
an idea is adopted, particular attention is given to cases that seem to support it, while
cases that seem to refute it are distorted, belittled, or ignored.
Scientists use the word theory in a way that differs from its usage in everyday
speech. In everyday speech, a theory is no different from a hypothesis—a supposition that has not been verified. A scientific theory, on the other hand, is a
synthesis of a large body of information that encompasses well-tested and verified hypotheses about certain aspects of the natural world. Physicists, for example,
speak of the quark theory of the atomic nucleus, chemists speak of the theory of
metallic bonding in metals, and biologists speak of the cell theory.
The theories of science are not fixed; rather, they undergo change. Scientific
theories evolve as they go through stages of redefinition and refinement. During
the past hundred years, for example, the theory of the atom has been repeatedly
refined as new evidence on atomic behavior has been gathered. Similarly, chemists
have refined their view of the way molecules bond together, and biologists have
refined the cell theory. The refinement of theories is a strength of science, not a
weakness. Many people feel that it is a sign of weakness to change their minds.
Competent scientists must be experts at changing their minds. They change their
minds, however, only when confronted with solid experimental evidence or when
a conceptually simpler hypothesis forces them to adopt a new point of view. More
important than defending beliefs is improving them. Better hypotheses are made
by those who are honest in the face of experimental evidence.
Away from their profession, scientists are inherently no more honest or ethical
than most other people. But in their profession they work in an arena that places a
high premium on honesty. The cardinal rule in science is that all hypotheses must
be testable—they must be susceptible, at least in principle, to being shown to be
wrong. In science, it is more important that there be a means of proving an idea
wrong than a means of proving it right. This is a major factor that distinguishes
science from nonscience. At first this may seem strange because when we wonder
about most things, we concern ourselves with ways of finding out whether they
But appeal to beauty has value in science. More than one experimental result in modern times has contradicted a lovely theory that, upon further investigation, proved to be wrong. This has bolstered scientists’
faith that the ultimately correct description of nature involves conciseness of expression and economy of
concepts—a combination that deserves to be called beautiful.
4
In your education it is not enough to be aware that other people may try to fool you; it is more important
to be aware of your own tendency to fool yourself.
3

Experiment, not philosophical
discussion, decides what is correct
in science.

9

10

C H A P T E R 1   A b o u t S ci e n ce

The essence of science is expressed
in two questions: How would we
know? And what evidence would
prove this idea wrong? Assertions
without evidence are unscientific and can be dismissed without
evidence.

Being scientific is being open to
new knowledge.

are true. Scientific hypotheses are different. In fact, if you want to distinguish
whether a hypothesis is scientific or not, check to see if there is a test for proving
it wrong. If there is no test for its possible wrongness, then the hypothesis is not
scientific. Albert Einstein put it well when he stated, “No number of experiments
can prove me right; a single experiment can prove me wrong.”
Consider the biologist Charles Darwin’s hypothesis that life forms evolve from
simpler to more complex forms. This could be proved wrong if paleontologists
discovered that more complex forms of life appeared before their simpler counterparts. Einstein hypothesized that light is bent by gravity. This might be proved
wrong if starlight that grazed the Sun and could be seen during a solar eclipse were
undeflected from its normal path. As it turned out, less complex life forms are
found to precede their more complex counterparts and starlight is found to bend
as it passes close to the Sun, which support the claims. If and when a hypothesis
or scientific claim is confirmed, it is regarded as useful and as a steppingstone to
additional knowledge.
Consider the hypothesis “The alignment of planets in the sky determines the
best time for making decisions.” Many people believe it, but this hypothesis is not
scientific. It cannot be proved wrong, nor can it be proved right. It is speculation.
Likewise, the hypothesis “Intelligent life exists on other planets somewhere in the
universe” is not scientific. Although it can be proved correct by the verification of a
single instance of intelligent life existing elsewhere in the universe, there is no way
to prove it wrong if no intelligent life is ever found. If we searched the far reaches
of the universe for eons and found no life, that would not prove that it doesn’t exist
“around the next corner.” On the other hand, the hypothesis “There is no other
intelligent life in the universe” is scientific. Do you see why?
A hypothesis that is capable of being proved right but not capable of being
proved wrong is not a scientific hypothesis. Many such statements are quite reasonable and useful, but they lie outside the domain of science.

Check Point
Which of these is a scientific hypothesis?
a. Atoms are the smallest particles of matter that exist.
b. Space is permeated with an essence that is undetectable.
c. Albert Einstein was the greatest physicist of the 20th century.
C h ec k Y o u r A n swer
Only statement a is scientific, because there is a test for falseness. The
statement not only is capable of being proved wrong but in fact has been
proved wrong. Statement b has no test for possible wrongness and is therefore unscientific. Likewise for any principle or concept for which there is
no means, procedure, or test whereby it can be shown to be wrong (if it is
wrong). Some pseudoscientists and other pretenders to knowledge will not
even consider a test for the possible wrongness of their statements. Statement c is an assertion that has no test for possible wrongness. If Einstein
was not the greatest physicist, how could we know? It is important to note
that because the name Einstein is generally held in high esteem, it is a
favorite of pseudoscientists. So we should not be surprised that the name
of Einstein, like that of Jesus or of any other highly respected person, is
cited often by charlatans who wish to bring respect to themselves and their
points of view. In all fields, it is prudent to be skeptical of those who wish to
credit themselves by calling upon the authority of others.

C H A P T E R 1    A b o u t S ci e n ce

None of us has the time, energy, or resources to test every idea, so most of the
time we accept somebody else’s word. How do we know whose word to accept?
To reduce the likelihood of error, scientists accept only the word of those whose
ideas, theories, and findings are testable—if not in practice, at least in principle. Speculations that cannot be tested are regarded as “unscientific.” This has
the long-run effect of compelling honesty—findings widely publicized among
fellow scientists are generally subjected to further testing. Sooner or later, mistakes (and deception) are discovered; wishful thinking is exposed. A discredited
scientist does not get a second chance in the community of scientists. The penalty for fraud is professional excommunication. Honesty, so important to the
progress of science, thus becomes a matter of self-interest to scientists. There is
relatively little bluffing in a game in which all bets are called. In fields of study
where right and wrong are not so easily established, the pressure to be honest is
considerably less.
The ideas and concepts most important to our everyday life are often unscientific; their correctness or incorrectness cannot be determined in the laboratory.
Interestingly enough, it seems that people honestly believe their own ideas about
things are correct, and almost everyone is acquainted with people who hold completely opposite views—so the ideas of some (or all) must be incorrect. How do you
know whether or not you are one of those holding erroneous beliefs? There is a test.
Before you can be reasonably convinced that you are right about a particular idea,
you should be sure that you understand the objections and the positions of your
most articulate antagonists. You should find out whether your views are supported
by sound knowledge of opposing ideas or by your misconceptions of opposing ideas.
You make this distinction by seeing whether or not you can state the objections
and positions of your opponents to their satisfaction. Even if you can successfully
do this, you cannot be absolutely certain of being right about your own ideas, but
the probability of being right is considerably higher if you pass this test.

Much learning can occur by asking questions. Socrates preached
this—hence the Socratic method.
Questioning has led to some of the
most magnificent works of art and
science.

C HE C K POI N T
Suppose that, in a disagreement between two friends, A and B, you note
that friend A only states and restates one point of view, whereas friend
B clearly states both her own position and that of friend A. Who is more
likely to be correct? (Think before you read the answer below!)
C h ec k Y o u r A n swer
Who knows for sure? Friend B may have the cleverness of a lawyer who can
state various points of view and still be incorrect. We can’t be sure about
the “other guy.” The test for correctness or incorrectness suggested here is
not a test of others, but of and for you. It can aid your personal development. As you attempt to articulate the ideas of your antagonists, be prepared, like scientists who are prepared to change their minds, to discover
evidence contrary to your own ideas—evidence that may alter your views.
Intellectual growth often occurs in this way.

Although the notion of being familiar with opposing points of view seems
reasonable to most thinking people, just the opposite—shielding ourselves and
others from different ideas—has been more widely practiced. We have been
taught to discredit unpopular ideas without understanding them in proper context. With the 20/20 vision of hindsight, we can see that many of the “deep
truths” that were the cornerstones of whole civilizations were shallow reflections

11

We each need a knowledge filter
to tell the difference between
what is valid and what only
pretends to be valid. The best
knowledge filter ever invented is
science.

