24.2 Magnetic Poles

The forces that magnets exert on one another are similar to electrical forces because both can attract and repel without touching, depending on which ends of the magnets are held near one another. Also like electrical forces, the strength of their interaction depends on the separation distance between the two magnets. Whereas electric charge is responsible for electrical forces, regions called magnetic poles give rise to magnetic forces.

If you suspend a bar magnet at its center by a piece of string, you'll have a compass. One end, called the north-seeking pole, points northward, and the opposite end, called the south-seeking pole, points southward. More simply, these are called the north and south poles. All magnets have both a north and a south pole (some have more than one of each). Refrigerator magnets, popular in recent years, have narrow strips of alternating north and south poles. These magnets are strong enough to hold sheets of paper against a refrigerator door, but they have a very short range because the north and south poles are close together and cancel at short distances. In a simple bar magnet, a single north pole and a single south pole are located at opposite ends. A common horseshoe magnet is simply a bar magnet that has been bent into a U shape. Its poles are also at its two ends (Figure 24.1).

Figure 24.1
A horseshoe magnet.

If magnets won't stick to your stainless steel refrigerator door, the door is probably a mixture of steel and nickel. But magnets will stick to stainless steel when it is made with chromium instead of nickel.

When the north pole of one magnet is brought near the north pole of another magnet, they repel.2 The same is true of a south pole near a south pole. If opposite poles are brought together, however, they attract. We find that

Like poles repel each other; opposite poles attract.

This rule is similar to the rule for the forces between electric charges, where like charges repel each other and unlike charges attract. But there is a very important difference between magnetic poles and electric charges. Whereas electric charges can be isolated, magnetic poles cannot. Negatively charged electrons and positively charged protons are entities by themselves. A cluster of electrons need not be accompanied by a cluster of protons, and vice versa. But a north magnetic pole never exists without the presence of a south pole, and vice versa.

2 The force of interaction between magnetic poles is given by F ~ p1p2/d2, where p1 and p2 represent the magnetic pole strengths and d represents the separation distance between the poles. Note the similarity of this relationship to Coulomb's law.

If you break a bar magnet in half, each half still behaves as a complete magnet. Break the pieces in half again, and you have four complete magnets. You can continue breaking the pieces in half and never isolate a single pole.3 Even when your piece is one atom thick, there are two poles, which suggests that atoms themselves are magnets.

Check Point
Does every magnet necessarily have a north and a south pole?

Check Your Answer
Yes, just as every coin has two sides, a "head" and a "tail." Some "trick" magnets have more than one pair of poles, but, nevertheless, poles always occur in pairs.

3 Theoretical physicists have speculated for more than 75 years about the possible existence of discrete magnetic "charges," called magnetic monopoles. These tiny particles would carry either a single north or a single south magnetic pole and would be the counterparts to the positive and negative charges in electricity. Various attempts have been made to find monopoles, but none has proved successful. All known magnets always have at least one north pole and one south pole.
