3
Linear Motion
                     Chapter 3

3.1   Motion Is Relative

3.2   Speed
3.3   Velocity

3.4   Acceleration

3.5   Free Fall

3.6   Velocity Vectors

1 Joan Lucas moves with increasing speed when the distance her horse travels each second increases. 2 Likewise for Sue Johnson (the first rower) and her crew, who win medals for high speed in their racing shell. 3 Carl Angell at the University of Oslo does what Galileo did some 400 years earlier, but with a photogate for measuring the ball’s speed. 4 Chelcie Liu asks his students to check their thinking with neighbors and predict which ball will first reach the end of the equal-length tracks.

In this chapter we continue with the ideas of a man who was subjected to house arrest because of his ideas, the Italian scientist Galileo Galilei, who died in the same year that Newton was born. Galileo’s ideas were to be a foundation for Isaac Newton, who, when asked about his success in science, replied that he stood on the shoulders of giants. Most notable of these was Galileo.

Galileo developed an early interest in motion and was soon at odds with his contemporaries, who held to Aristotelian ideas on falling bodies and generally believed that the Sun goes around Earth. Galileo left Pisa to teach at the University of Padua and became an advocate of the new Copernican theory of the solar system. He was the first man to discover mountains on the Moon and to find the moons of Jupiter. Because he published his findings in Italian, the language of the people, instead of in Latin, the language of scholars, and because of the recent invention of the printing press, Galileo’s ideas reached a wide readership. He soon ran afoul of the Church, and he was warned not to teach or hold to Copernican views. He restrained himself publicly for nearly 15 years and then defiantly published his observations and conclusions, which were counter to Church doctrine. The outcome was a trial in which he was found guilty, and he was forced to renounce his discovery that Earth moves. As he walked out of the court, it is said that he whispered, “But it moves.” By then an old man, broken in health and spirit, Galileo was sentenced to perpetual house arrest. Nevertheless, he completed his studies on motion, and his writings were smuggled out of Italy and published in Holland. His ideas on motion are the subject of this chapter.

3.1 Motion Is Relative

Everything moves—even things that appear to be at rest. They move relative to the Sun and stars. As you’re reading this, you’re moving at about 107,000 kilometers per hour relative to the Sun, and you’re moving even faster relative to the center of our galaxy. When we discuss the motion of something, we describe the motion relative to something else. If you walk down the aisle of a moving bus, your speed relative to the floor of the bus is likely quite different from your speed relative to the road. When we say a racing car reaches a speed of 300 kilometers per hour, we mean relative to the track. Unless stated otherwise, when we discuss the speeds of things in our environment, we mean relative to the surface of Earth. Motion is relative.

Figure 3.1
When you sit on a chair, your speed is zero relative to Earth but 30 km/s relative to the Sun.

If you look out an airplane window and view another plane flying at the same speed in the opposite direction, you’ll see it flying twice as fast—nicely illustrating relative motion.

Check Point
A hungry mosquito sees you resting in a hammock in a 3-m/s breeze. How fast and in what direction should the mosquito fly in order to hover above you for lunch?

Check Your Answer
The mosquito should fly toward you into the breeze. When just above you, it should fly at 3 m/s in order to hover at rest. Unless its grip on your skin is strong enough after landing, it must continue flying at 3 m/s to keep from being blown off. That’s why a breeze is an effective deterrent to mosquito bites.
