--- PDF page 117 / textbook page 358 ---
358     pa r t f o u r   Sound



                                          Vibration of a Pendulum
                                          If we suspend a stone at the end of a piece of string, we have a simple pendulum.
                                          Likewise for a sand-filled container suspended at the end of a vertical pole that
                                          swings to and fro. In the chapter-opening photos, Frank Oppenheimer shows how
                                          sand leaking from such a pendulum traces a straight line on a stationary conveyor
                                          belt and then, when the belt moves at constant speed, produces a special curve
                                          known as a sine curve. A sine curve is a pictorial representation of a wave produced
                                          by simple harmonic motion.1
                                              Pendulums swing to and fro with such regularity that, for a long time, they
                                          were used to control the motion of most clocks. They can still be found in grand-
                                          father clocks and cuckoo clocks. Galileo discovered that the time a pendulum
                                          takes to swing to and fro through small distances depends on only the length
                                          of the pendulum.2 The time of a to-and-fro swing, called the period, does not
                                          depend on either the mass of the pendulum or the size of the arc through which
                                          it swings.

F i g u r e 1 9 .1
If you drop two balls of different
mass, they accelerate at g. Let them
slide without friction down the
incline, and they slide together at
the same fraction of g. Tie them to
strings of the same length so that
they are pendulums, and they swing
to and fro in unison. In all cases, the
motions are independent of mass.




                                              A long pendulum has a longer period than a short pendulum; that is, it swings
                                          to and fro less frequently than a short pendulum. A grandfather clock’s pendulum
                                          with a length of about 1 meter, for example, swings with a leisurely period of
  In 1848, Jean Foucault devised a
  very long pendulum that, when
                                          2 seconds, while the much shorter pendulum of a cuckoo clock swings with a
  swinging, appears to be changing        period that is less than a second. In addition to length, the period of a pendu-
  directions during the day. Actually,    lum depends on the acceleration due to gravity. Oil and mineral prospectors use
  Earth revolves underneath the           very sensitive pendulums to detect slight differences in this acceleration, which is
  pendulum.
                                          ­affected by the densities of underlying formations.


                                              19.2      Wave Description
                                          A sine curve can also be traced by a bob attached to a spring undergoing vertical
                                          simple harmonic motion (Figure 19.2). As mentioned, a sine curve is a pictorial
                                          representation of a wave. As for a water wave, the high points of a sine wave are
   SCREENCAST: Good Vibrations
                                          called crests and the low points are called troughs. The straight dashed line in
          and Waves
                                          1
                                           The condition for simple harmonic motion is that the restoring force is proportional to the displacement
                                          from equilibrium. This condition is met, at least approximately, for most vibrations. The component of
                                          weight that restores a displaced pendulum to its equilibrium position is directly proportional to the pendu-
                                          lum’s displacement (for small angles)—likewise for a bob attached to a spring. Recall, from Chapter 12, that
                                          Hooke’s law for a spring is F 5 kDx, where the force to stretch (or compress) a spring is directly proportional
                                          to the distance stretched (or compressed).
                                                                                                                           L
                                          2
                                            The equation for the period of a simple pendulum for small arcs is T = 2p g , where T is the period, L is
                                                                                                                        A
                                          the length of the pendulum, and g is the acceleration due to gravity.

--- PDF page 118 / textbook page 359 ---
C H A P T E R 19    V i b r at i o n s a n d Wav e s   359

                                                                                          Figure 19.2
                                               Wavelength
                                                                                            INTERACTIVE FIGURE

                                                                                          When the bob vibrates up and down,
                           Amplitude                                                      a marking pen traces a sine curve on
                                                                                          paper that is moved horizontally at
                               Wavelength                                                 constant speed.




the figure represents the midpoint of the vibration, the equilibrium position.
The term amplitude refers to the distance from the midpoint to the crest (or
trough) of the wave. So the amplitude equals the maximum displacement from
equilibrium.
    The wavelength of a wave is the distance from the top of one crest to the top
of the next crest. Or, equivalently, the wavelength is the distance between any
successive identical parts of the wave. The wavelengths of waves at the beach
are measured in meters, the wavelengths of ripples in a pond are measured in
centimeters, and the wavelengths of light are measured in billionths of a meter
(nanometers).
    How frequently a vibration occurs is described by its frequency. The frequency
of a vibrating pendulum, or of an object on a spring, is the number of to-and-fro
vibrations it makes in a given time (usually 1 second). A complete to-and-fro os-            The frequency of a “classical”
cillation is one vibration. If a vibration occurs in 1 second, the frequency is one          wave—such as a sound wave,
vibration per second. If two vibrations occur in 1 second, the frequency is two              water wave, or radio wave—
vibrations per second.                                                                       matches the frequency of its
                                                                                             vibrating source. (In the quantum
    The unit of frequency is called the hertz (Hz), after Heinrich Hertz, who dem-           world of atoms and photons, the
onstrated radio waves in 1886. One vibration per second is 1 hertz; two v­ ibrations         rules are different.)
per second is 2 hertz; and so on. Higher frequencies are measured in kilohertz
(kHz, thousands of hertz) and still higher frequencies in megahertz (MHz, mil-
lions of hertz) or gigahertz (GHz, billions of hertz). AM radio waves are measured
in kilohertz, and FM radio waves are measured in megahertz; ­radar and micro-
wave ovens operate at gigahertz frequencies. A station at 960 kHz on the AM
radio dial, for example, broadcasts radio waves that have a frequency of 960,000
vibrations per second. A station at 101.7 MHz on the FM dial broadcasts radio
waves with a frequency of 101,700,000 hertz. These radio-wave frequencies are
the frequencies at which electrons are forced to vibrate in the antenna of a radio
station’s transmitting tower. So we see that the source of all waves is something
that vibrates. The frequency of the vibrating source and the frequency of the
wave it produces are the same.
    The period of a vibration or wave is the time for one complete vibration. If
an object’s frequency is known, then its period can be calculated, and vice versa.
Suppose, for example, that a pendulum makes two vibrations in 1 second. Its fre-          Figure 19.3
quency is 2 Hz. The time needed to complete one vibration—that is, the period of          Electrons in the transmitting antenna
vibration—is 1/2 second. Or, if the vibration frequency is 3 Hz, then the period is       vibrate 940,000 times each second
1/3 second. Frequency (vibrations per second) and period (seconds per vibration)          and produce 940-kHz radio waves.
are reciprocals:

                                                 1
                               Frequency =
                                               period
or, vice versa,

                                                1
                               Period =
                                            frequency

--- PDF page 119 / textbook page 360 ---
360     PA R T F O U R    SOUND




                                            CHECK POINT
                                            1. An electric toothbrush completes 90 cycles every second. What are (a) its
                                               frequency and (b) its period?
                                            2. Gusts of wind make the Willis Tower in Chicago sway back and forth,
                                               completing a cycle in 10 s. What are (a) its frequency and (b) its
                                               period?


                                            CHECK YOUR ANSWERS
                                            1. (a) 90 cycles per second is 90 Hz; (b) 1/90 s.
                                            2. (a) 1/10 Hz; (b) 10 s.




                                           19.3     Wave Motion
                                          Most information about our surroundings arrives in some form of waves. It is
                                          through wave motion that sounds are transported to our ears, light to our eyes, and
                                          electromagnetic signals to our radios and wireless phones. Through wave motion,
                                          energy can be transferred from a source to a receiver without the transfer of matter
  Numerous fans at a concert or sta-
  dium “do the wave” by rising from
                                          between the two points.
  their seats, swinging their arms           Wave motion can be most easily understood by first considering the simple
  high, and then sitting back down        case of a horizontally stretched rope. If one end of such a rope is shaken up and
  in their seats—all in an appropri-      down, a rhythmic disturbance travels along the rope. Each particle of the rope
  ate sequence.
                                          moves up and down, while, at the same time, the disturbance moves along the
                                          length of the rope. The medium, rope or whatever, returns to its initial condi-
                                          tion after the disturbance has passed. What is propagated is the disturbance, the
                                          energy of wave motion, not the medium itself.
                                                            Perhaps a more familiar example of wave motion is a water wave. If
                                                        a stone is dropped into a quiet pond, waves travel outward in expand-
                                                        ing circles, the centers of which are at the source of the disturbance.
                                                        In this case, we might think that water is being transported with the
                                                        waves, since water is splashed onto previously dry ground when the
                                                        waves meet the shore. We should realize, however, that, barring obsta-
                                                        cles, the water will flow back into the pond and things will be much
                                                        as they were in the beginning. The surface of the water will have been
                                                        disturbed, but the water itself will have gone nowhere. A leaf on the
                                                        surface will bob up and down, and drift to and fro, as the waves pass,
                                                        but the leaf will end up where it started. Again, the medium returns
                                                        to its initial condition after the disturbance has passed—even in the
FIGURE 19.4
                                                        extreme case of a tsunami.
Water waves.
                                             Let us consider another example of a wave to illustrate that what is transported
                                          from one location to another is a disturbance in a medium, not the medium itself.
                                          If you view a field of tall grass from an elevated position on a gusty day, you will
                                          see waves travel across the grass. The individual stems of grass do not leave their
                                          places; instead, they swing to and fro. Furthermore, if you stand in a narrow foot-
  Mechanical waves require a medium.
  A Slinky needs its coils; ocean waves
                                          path, the grass that blows over the edge of the path, brushing against your legs, is
  need water; sound from a bugle          very much like the water that doused the shore in our earlier example. While wave
  needs air; “doing the wave” in a        motion continues, the tall grass swings back and forth, vibrating between definite
  stadium needs exuberant fans.           limits but going nowhere. When the wave motion stops, the grass returns to its
                                          initial position.