3.4 Acceleration

We can change the velocity of something by changing its speed, by changing its direction, or by changing both its speed and its direction. How quickly and in what direction velocity changes is acceleration:

Acceleration = change of velocity / time interval

We are familiar with acceleration in an automobile. When the driver depresses the gas pedal (appropriately called the accelerator), the passengers experience acceleration (or “pickup,” as it is sometimes called) as they are pressed against their seats. The key idea that defines acceleration is change. Suppose we are driving and, in 1 second, we steadily increase our velocity from 30 kilometers per hour to 35 kilometers per hour, and then to 40 kilometers per hour in the next second, to 45 in the next second, and so on. We change our velocity by 5 kilometers per hour each second. This change in velocity is what we mean by acceleration.

Acceleration = change of velocity / time interval = 5 km/h / 1 s = 5 km/h·s

In this case, the acceleration is 5 kilometers per hour second (abbreviated as 5 km/h·s), in the forward direction. Note that a unit for time enters twice: once for the unit of velocity and again for the time interval in which the velocity is changing. Also note that acceleration is not just the total change in velocity; it is the time rate of change, or change per second, in velocity.

Check Point
1. A particular car can go from rest to 90 km/h in 10 s. What is its acceleration?
2. In 2.5 s, a car increases its speed from 60 km/h to 65 km/h while a bicycle goes from rest to 5 km/h. Which undergoes the greater acceleration? What is the acceleration of each?

Check Your Answers
1. The acceleration is 9 km/h·s. Strictly speaking, this would be its average acceleration because there may have been some variation in its rate of picking up speed.
2. The accelerations of both the car and the bicycle are the same: 2 km/h·s.
accelerationcar = Δv / Δt = (65 km/h - 60 km/h) / 2.5 s = 5 km/h / 2.5 s = 2 km/h·s
accelerationbike = Δv / Δt = (5 km/h - 0 km/h) / 2.5 s = 5 km/h / 2.5 s = 2 km/h·s
Although the velocities are quite different, the rates of change of velocity are the same. Hence, the accelerations are equal.

The term acceleration applies to decreases as well as to increases in velocity. We say the brakes of a car, for example, produce large retarding accelerations; that is, there is a large decrease per second in the velocity of the car. We often call this deceleration. We experience deceleration when the driver of a bus or car applies the brakes and we tend to lurch forward.

We accelerate whenever we move in a curved path, even if we are moving at constant speed, because our direction is changing every instant—hence, our velocity is changing. We distinguish speed and velocity for this reason and define acceleration as the rate at which velocity changes, thereby encompassing changes both in speed and in direction.

Anyone who has stood in a crowded bus has experienced the difference between velocity and acceleration. Except for the effects of a bumpy road, you can stand with no extra effort inside a bus that moves at constant velocity, no matter how fast it is going. You can flip a coin and catch it exactly as if the bus were at rest. It is only when the bus accelerates—speeds up, slows down, or turns—that you experience difficulty standing.

In much of this book, we will be concerned only with motion along a straight line. When one-way straight-line motion is being considered, it is common to use the terms speed and velocity interchangeably. When direction doesn’t change, acceleration may be expressed as the rate at which speed changes.

Acceleration (along a straight line) = change in speed / time interval

Check Point
1. What is the acceleration of a race car that whizzes past you at a constant velocity of 400 km/h?
2. Which undergoes greater acceleration: an airplane that goes from 1000 km/h to 1005 km/h in 10 seconds or a skateboard that goes from zero to 5 km/h in 1 second?

Check Your Answers
1. Zero, because its velocity doesn’t change.
2. Both gain 5 km/h, but the skateboard does so in one-tenth the time. The skateboard therefore has the greater acceleration—in fact, ten times greater. A little figuring will show that the acceleration of the airplane is 0.5 km/h·s, whereas the acceleration of the slower-moving skateboard is 5 km/h·s. Velocity and acceleration are very different concepts. Distinguishing between them is very important.

Acceleration on Galileo’s Inclined Planes

Galileo developed the concept of acceleration in his experiments on inclined planes. His main interest was falling objects, and, because he lacked accurate timing devices, he used inclined planes effectively to slow accelerated motion and to investigate it more carefully.

Galileo found that a ball rolling down an inclined plane picks up the same amount of speed in successive seconds; that is, the ball rolls with unchanging acceleration—constant acceleration. For example, a ball rolling down a plane inclined at a certain angle might be found to pick up a speed of 2 meters per second for each second it rolls. This gain per second is its acceleration. Its instantaneous velocity at 1-second intervals, at this acceleration, is then 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and so forth, meters per second. We can see that the instantaneous speed or velocity of the ball at any given time after being released from rest is simply equal to its acceleration multiplied by the time:

Velocity acquired = acceleration * time

If we substitute the acceleration of the ball in this relationship (2 meters per second squared), we can see that, at the end of 1 second, the ball is traveling at 2 meters per second; at the end of 2 seconds, it is traveling at 4 meters per second; at the end of 10 seconds, it is traveling at 20 meters per second; and so on. The instantaneous speed or velocity at any time is equal to the acceleration multiplied by the number of seconds it has been accelerating.

Galileo found that acceleration down each incline was constant for each incline, with greater accelerations for steeper inclines. The ball attains its maximum acceleration when the incline is tipped vertically. Then it falls with the acceleration of a falling object (Figure 3.6). Regardless of the weight or size of the object, Galileo discovered that, when air resistance is small enough to be ignored, all objects fall with the same unchanging acceleration.

Margin/media text:
VIDEO: Definition of Acceleration
VIDEO: Numerical Example of Acceleration
Can you see that a car has three controls that change velocity—the gas pedal (accelerator), the brakes, and the steering wheel?
How nice—the acceleration due to gravity is 10 m/s each second all the way down. Why this is so, for any mass, awaits you in Chapter 4.

Footnotes:
2 The phrases “change in” and “difference in” can be represented with the Greek symbol delta, Δ. Then we can express acceleration as Δv/Δt, where Δv is the change in velocity and Δt is the corresponding change in time. The expression gives average acceleration. Most accelerated motions treated in this book will be of constant acceleration.
3 Note that this relationship follows from the definition of acceleration. For a ball starting from rest, a = Δv/Δt can be written a = v/t and then rearranged (multiplying both sides of the equation by t) to v = at.
