Section 2.5 The Equilibrium Rule

If you tie a string around a 2-pound bag of flour and hang it on a weighing scale (Figure 2.13), a spring in the scale stretches until the scale reads 2 pounds. The stretched spring is under a “stretching force” called tension. The same scale in a science lab is likely calibrated to read the same force as 9 newtons. Both pounds and newtons are units of weight, which in turn are units of force. The bag of flour is attracted to Earth with a gravitational force of 2 pounds—or, equivalently, 9 newtons. Hang twice as much flour from the scale and the reading will be 18 newtons.

Figure 2.13 Burl Grey, who first introduced the author to tension forces, suspends a 2-lb bag of flour from a spring scale, showing its weight and the tension in the string of about 9 N.

Note that there are two forces acting on the bag of flour—tension force acting upward and weight acting downward. The two forces on the bag are equal and opposite, and they cancel to zero. Hence, the bag remains at rest. In accord with Newton’s first law, no net force acts on the bag. We can look at Newton’s first law in a different light—mechanical equilibrium.

When the net force on something is zero, we say that something is in mechanical equilibrium.5 In mathematical notation, the equilibrium rule is
ΣF = 0

The symbol Σ stands for “the vector sum of” and F stands for “forces.” For a suspended object at rest, like the bag of flour, the rule says that the forces acting upward on the object must be balanced by other forces acting downward to make the vector sum equal to zero. (Vector quantities take direction into account, so if upward forces are +, downward ones are –, and, when added, they actually subtract.)

In Figure 2.14, we see the forces involved for Burl and Paul on their sign-painting scaffold. The sum of the upward tensions is equal to the sum of their weights plus the weight of the scaffold. Note how the magnitudes of the two upward vectors equal the magnitude of the three downward vectors. The net force on the scaffold is zero, so we say it is in mechanical equilibrium.

Figure 2.14 The sum of the upward forces equals the sum of the downward forces. ΣF = 0 and the scaffold is in equilibrium.

Check Point
Consider the gymnast hanging from the rings.
1. If she hangs with her weight evenly divided between the two rings, how will the scale readings in both supporting ropes compare with her weight?
2. Suppose she hangs with slightly more of her weight supported by the left ring. How will the right scale read?

Check Your Answers
(Are you reading this before you have formulated reasoned answers in your thinking? If so, do you also exercise your body by watching others do push-ups? Exercise your thinking: When you encounter the many Check Point questions throughout this book, think before you read the answers!)
1. The reading on each scale will be half her weight. The sum of the readings on both scales then equals her weight.
2. When more of her weight is supported by the left ring, the reading on the right scale will be lower. Can you see that this is a less exaggerated situation than was shown in Figure 2.11, with the left and right ropes reversed?

Everything not undergoing changes in motion is in mechanical equilibrium. That’s when ΣF = 0.

Practicing Physics
1. When Burl stands alone in the exact middle of his scaffold, the left scale reads 500 N. Fill in the reading on the right scale. The total weight of Burl and the scaffold must be _____ N.
2. Burl stands farther from the left end. Fill in the reading on the right scale.
3. In a silly mood, Burl dangles from the right end. Fill in the reading on the right scale.

Practicing Physics Answers
Do your answers illustrate the equilibrium rule? In question 1, the right rope undergoes 500 N of tension because Burl is in the middle and both ropes support his weight equally. Since the sum of upward tensions is 1000 N, the total weight of Burl and the scaffold must be 1000 N. Let’s call the upward tension forces +1000 N. Then the downward weights are –1000 N. What happens when you add +1000 N and –1000 N? The answer is that they equal zero. So we see that ΣF = 0.

For question 2, did you get the correct answer of 830 N? Reasoning: We know from question 1 that the sum of the rope tensions equals 1000 N, and since the left rope has a tension of 170 N, the other rope must make up the difference—that is, 1000 N – 170 N = 830 N. Get it? If so, great. If not, talk about it with your friends until you do. Then read further.

The answer to question 3 is 1000 N. Do you see that this illustrates ΣF = 0?

5 Something that is in equilibrium is without a change in its state of motion. When we study rotational motion in Chapter 8, we’ll see that another condition for mechanical equilibrium is that the net torque equals zero.
