--- PDF page index 33 ---
4
Newton’s 
Second Law of 
Motion
1
2
3
4
1   Jill Johnsen asks her class why the heavier ball, when 
dropped, doesn’t fall faster than the lighter ball.  2  Efrain 
Lopez shows that when the forces on the blue block balance 
to zero, no acceleration occurs.  3  Wingsuit flyers do what 
flying squirrels have always done, but faster.  4  When Emily 
Abrams kicks the ball, it undergoes acceleration.
4.1	
Force Causes Acceleration
4.2	
Friction
4.3	
Mass and Weight
4.4	
Newton’s Second Law of Motion
4.5	
When Acceleration Is g—Free Fall
4.6	
When Acceleration Is Less Than g— 
Nonfree Fall
C h a p t e r  4


--- PDF page index 34 ---
58
Physics
part One
the Trinity as a foundational 
tenet of Christianity at that 
time. It wasn’t until Newton 
was 42 years of age that he 
included his three laws of 
motion in what is generally 
acknowledged as the greatest 
scientific book ever written, 
Philosophiae Naturalis Prin-
cipia Mathematica.
When Newton was 46, 
his energies turned some-
what from science and he 
was elected to a one-year 
term as a member of Parlia-
ment. At 57, he was elected to a second term. In his two 
years in Parliament, he never gave a speech. One day he 
rose and the House fell silent to hear the great man. New-
ton’s “speech” was very brief; he simply requested that a 
window be closed because of a draft. He was also a mem-
ber of the Royal Society and at age 60 was elected presi-
dent, then was reelected each year for the rest of his life.
Although Newton’s hair turned gray at age 30, it 
remained full, long, and wavy all his life, and, unlike oth-
ers in his time, he did not wear a wig. He was a modest 
man, overly sensitive to criticism, and never married. He 
remained healthy in body and mind into old age. At 80, 
he still had all his teeth, his eyesight and hearing were 
sharp, and his mind was alert. In his lifetime he was 
regarded by his countrymen as the greatest scientist who 
ever lived. He was knighted by Queen Anne in 1705.
Newton died at the age of 84 and was buried in West-
minster Abbey along with England’s monarchs and heroes. 
His laws of motion provided the foundation for the Apollo 
Program, which 282 years later put humans on the Moon. 
His first law was the law of inertia, as we saw in Chapter 2. 
In this chapter we treat his second law of motion.
G
alileo introduced the concept of acceleration, 
the rate at which velocity changes with time— 
a = Dv/Dt. But what produces acceleration? 
That question is answered in Newton’s second law. It is 
force. Newton’s second law links the fundamental con-
cepts of acceleration and force to Galileo’s concept of mass, 
given by the famous equation a 5 F/m. Interestingly, Isaac 
Newton first became famous not for his laws of motion or 
even for his law of universal gravitation. His fame began 
with his study of light, finding that white light was com-
posed of the colors of the rainbow.
Isaac Newton was born prematurely on Christmas 
Day, 1642, and he barely survived in his mother’s farm-
house in England. His father died several months before 
his birth, and he grew up under the care of his mother 
and grandmother. As a child, he showed no particular 
signs of brightness; as a young teen, he was taken out of 
school to help manage his mother’s farm. He had little 
interest in farming, preferring to read books he borrowed 
from a neighbor. An uncle, who sensed the scholarly 
potential in young Isaac, arranged for him to go back to 
school for a year and then graduate from the University of 
Cambridge, without particular distinction.
When a plague swept through England, Newton 
retreated to his mother’s farm—this time to continue 
his studies. There, at the age of 22 and 23, he laid the 
foundations for the work that was to make him immor-
tal. Legend tells us that seeing an apple fall to the ground 
led him to consider the force of gravity extending to the 
Moon and beyond. He formulated and applied the law 
of universal gravitation to solving the centuries-old mys-
teries of planetary motion and ocean tides, which we’ll 
return to in Chapter 9.
At the age of 26 Newton was appointed the Lucasian 
Professor of Mathematics at Trinity College in Cam-
bridge. He had personal conflicts with the religious posi-
tions of the College—namely, questioning the idea of 
Isaac Newton 
(1642–1727)
	 4.1	 Force Causes Acceleration
Consider a hockey puck at rest on ice. Hit the puck (apply a force), and it acceler-
ates. When the hockey stick is no longer pushing it—that is, when no unbalanced 
forces act on the puck—it moves at constant velocity. Apply another force by strik-
ing the puck again, and again the motion changes. Unbalanced forces acting on an 
object cause the object to accelerate.
Most often, the applied force is not the only force acting on an object. Other 
forces may act as well. Recall from Chapter 2 that the combination of forces acting 
on an object is the net force. Acceleration depends on the net force. To increase the 
acceleration of an object, you must increase the net force acting on it. If you double 
F i g u r e  4 .1 
Kick the ball and it accelerates.
58
Mechanics
part One


--- PDF page index 35 ---
59
CHAPTER 4 
 
New ton’s Second L aw of Motion
the net force on an object, its acceleration doubles; if you triple the net force, its 
acceleration triples; and so on. This makes good sense. We say that an object’s ac-
celeration is directly proportional to the net force acting on it, and we write
Acceleration ∼ net force
The symbol , stands for “is directly proportional to.” That means, for instance, if 
one doubles, the other also doubles.
C h e c k  P o i n t
1.  You push on a crate that sits on a smooth floor, and it accelerates. 
If you apply four times the net force, how much greater will be the 
acceleration?
2.  If you push with the same increased force on the same crate on a very 
rough floor, how will the acceleration compare with pushing the crate 
on a smooth floor? (Think before you read the answer below!)
C h e c k  Y o u r  A n s w e r s
1.  The crate will have four times as much acceleration.
2.  The crate will have less acceleration because friction will reduce the net 
force.
	 4.2	 Friction
When surfaces slide or tend to slide over one another, a force of friction acts. 
When you apply a force to an object, friction usually reduces the net force and 
the resulting acceleration. Friction is caused by the irregularities in the surfaces in 
mutual contact, and it depends on the kinds of material and how much they are 
pressed together. Even surfaces that appear to be very smooth have microscopic ir-
regularities that obstruct motion. Atoms cling together at many points of contact. 
When one object slides against another, it must either rise over the irregular bumps 
or else scrape atoms off. Either way requires force.
The direction of the friction force is always in the direction that opposes mo-
tion. An object sliding down an incline experiences friction directed up the incline; 
an object that slides to the right experiences friction toward the left. Thus, if an 
object is to move at constant velocity, a force equal to the opposing force of friction 
must be applied so that the two forces exactly cancel each other. The zero net force 
then results in zero acceleration and constant velocity.
No friction exists on a crate that sits at rest on a level floor. But, if you push 
the crate horizontally, you’ll disturb the contact surfaces and friction is produced. 
How much? If the crate is still at rest, then the friction that opposes motion is just 
enough to cancel your push. If you push horizontally with, say, 70 newtons, the 
friction builds up to become 70 newtons. If you push harder—say, 100 ­newtons—
and the crate is on the verge of sliding, the friction between the crate and floor 
opposes your push with 100 newtons. If 100 newtons is the most the surfaces can 
muster, then, when you push a bit harder, the clinging gives way and the crate 
slides.1
F i g u r e  4 . 2
Acceleration is directly proportional 
to force.
Twice as much force
produces twice as
much acceleration 
Force of hand
accelerates
the brick
Twice the force on
twice the mass gives
the same acceleration
F i g u r e  4 . 3
Friction results from surface irregu-
larities and mutual attractions (sticki-
ness) between atoms in the surfaces 
of sliding objects. Even surfaces that 
appear to be smooth have irregular 
surfaces when viewed at the micro-
scopic level.
1Even though it may not seem so yet, most of the concepts in physics are not really complicated. But friction 
is different; it is a very complicated phenomenon. The findings are empirical (gained from a wide range of 
experiments) and the predictions approximate (also based on experiment).
video: Force Causes Acceleration
