Chapter 23, Section 23.2 - Voltage Sources
Source PDF used: ~CP_Curriculum_Sections(3).pdf
Textbook pages used: 432-433.

23.2 Voltage Sources
Charges flow only when they are "pushed" or "driven." A sustained current requires a suitable pumping device to provide a difference in electric potential-a voltage. If we charge one metal sphere positively and another negatively, we can develop a large voltage between the spheres. This voltage source is not a good electrical pump because, when the spheres are connected by a conductor, the potentials equalize in a single brief surge of moving charges-like discharging a Van de Graaff generator. It is not practical. Generators or chemical batteries, on the other hand, are suitable pumps in electric circuits and can maintain a steady flow.

Batteries and electric generators do work to pull negative charges away from positive ones. In chemical batteries, this work is usually, but not always, done by the chemical disintegration of zinc or lead in acid, and the energy stored in the chemical bonds is converted to electric potential energy.2 Generators, such as alternators in automobiles, separate charge by electromagnetic induction, a process we will describe in Chapter 25. The work done by whatever means in separating the opposite charges is available at the terminals of the battery or generator. These different values of energy per charge create a difference in potential (voltage). This voltage provides the "electrical pressure" to move electrons through a circuit.

Figure 23.2
Each coulomb of charge made to flow in a circuit that connects the ends of this 1.5-V flashlight cell is energized with 1.5 J.

A single flashlight cell supplies 1.5 V. Inside a 9-V battery are six little cells of 1.5 V each.

The unit of electric potential difference (voltage) is the volt.3 A common automobile battery provides an electrical pressure of 12 V to a circuit connected across its terminals. Then 12 J of energy are supplied to each coulomb of charge that is made to flow in the circuit joined to these terminals.

There is often some confusion about the charge flowing through a circuit and the voltage placed, or impressed, across a circuit. We can distinguish between these ideas by considering a long pipe filled with water. Water will flow through the pipe if there is a difference in pressure across (or between) its ends. Water flows from the high-pressure end to the low-pressure end. Only the water flows, not the pressure. Similarly, electric charge flows because of the differences in electrical pressure (voltage). You say that charges flow through a circuit because of an applied voltage across the circuit. You don't say that voltage flows through a circuit. Voltage doesn't go anywhere; it is the charges that move. Voltage produces current (if there is a complete circuit).

Figure 23.3
An unusual source of voltage. The electric potential between the head and tail of the electric eel (Electrophorus electricus) can be up to 600 V.

Store your batteries in a cool, dry place. If you put them in a refrigerator, they'll last a bit longer.

While Alessandro Volta was experimenting with metals and acids in 1791, he touched a silver spoon and a piece of tin to his tongue (saliva is slightly acidic) and connected them with a piece of copper wire. The sour taste indicated electricity. He went on to assemble a pile of cells to form a battery. In Volta's honor, electric potential is measured in units of "volts." (Touch the two terminals of a 9-volt battery to your tongue to experience this for yourself.)

Check Point
Is the voltage between two points in an electric circuit related to the flow of electrons between the points?

Check Your Answer
Yes, and we will soon see that it relates to the amount of energy given to the electrons.

Footnote 2
The life of a battery depends on the length of time it shares its chemical energy with circuit devices. Like water pipes that become clogged with overuse and time, batteries build up resistance that further shortens their useful lives. An explanation of how batteries operate can be found in almost any chemistry textbook.

Footnote 3
The terminology in this area of physics can be confusing, so a clarification of terms may be useful: Electric potential and potential mean the same thing-electric potential energy per unit charge. Its units are volts. The term voltage is usually used to indicate the difference in electric potential between two points in a conducting path. Units of voltage are also volts.
