96      part O n e      M e ch a n i cs



                                            6.4      Bouncing
  A flowerpot dropped onto your
                                          If a flowerpot falls from a shelf onto your head, you may be in trouble. If it bounces
  head bounces quickly. Ouch! If the      off your head, you may be in more serious trouble. Why? Because impulses are great-
  bouncing took a longer time, as         er when an object bounces. The impulse required to bring an object to a stop and
  with a safety net, then the force       then to “throw it back again” is greater than the impulse required merely to bring
  of the bounce would be much
  smaller.
                                          the object to a stop. Suppose, for example, that you catch the falling pot with your
                                          hands. You provide an impulse to reduce its momentum to zero. If you throw the pot
                                          upward again, you have to provide additional impulse. This increased amount of im-
                                          pulse is the same as the impulse your head supplies if the flowerpot bounces from it.
                                              One of the photos at the beginning of this chapter shows physics instructor
                                          Howie Brand swinging a dart against a wooden block. When the dart has a nail
                                          at its nose, the dart comes to a halt as it sticks to the block. The block remains
                                          upright. When the nail is removed and the nose of the dart is half of a solid rubber
                                          ball, the dart bounces upon contact with the block. The block topples over. The
                                          force against the block is greater when bouncing occurs.
                                              The fact that impulses are greater when bouncing occurs was used with great
                                          success during the California Gold Rush. Inefficient paddle wheels were used in
                                          mining operations at the time. The concept of bouncing was employed by Lester
                                          A. Pelton, who designed a curved paddle that caused the incoming water to bounce
                                          upon impact. The bouncing of the water greatly increased the impulse on the wheel.

F i g u r e 6 .1 0
A Pelton wheel. The curved blades
cause water to bounce and make a
U-turn, which produces a greater
impulse to turn the wheel.




                                                                                                      Impulse




                                            C h e c k Po i n t
                                            1. In reference to Figure 6.9, how does the force that Cassy exerts on the
                                               bricks compare with the force exerted on her hand?
                                            2. How will the impulse resulting from the impact differ if her hand
                                               bounces back upon striking the bricks?


                                            Check Your Answers
                                            1. In accord with Newton’s third law, the forces are equal. Only the resil-
                                               ience of the human hand and the training she has undergone to toughen
                                               her hand allow this feat to be performed without broken bones.
                                            2. The impulse will be greater if her hand bounces from the bricks upon
                                               impact. If the time of impact is not correspondingly increased, a greater
                                               force will then be exerted on the bricks (and her hand!).
