20.3 Reflection of Sound
We call the reflection of sound an echo. The fraction of energy carried by the reflected sound wave can be large if the surface is rigid and smooth, and small if the surface is soft and irregular. Sound energy that is not carried by the reflected sound wave is carried by the “transmitted” (absorbed) wave.

Sound reflects from a smooth surface the same way that light does—the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection (Figure 20.6). Sometimes, when sound reflects from the walls, ceiling, and floor of a room, the reflecting surfaces are too reflective and the sound becomes garbled. When sound undergoes multiple reflections and persists after the source has ceased emitting, we hear reverberations.

On the other hand, if the reflective surfaces are too absorbent, the sound level will be low and the room will sound dull and lifeless. Reflection of sound in a room makes it sound lively and full, as you have probably discovered while singing in the shower. In the design of an auditorium or concert hall, a balance must be achieved between reverberation and absorption. The study of sound properties is called acoustics.

Bats hunt moths in darkness by echolocation. Some moths are protected by a thick covering of fuzzy scales that deaden the echoes.

Figure 20.6
The angle of incident sound is equal to the angle of reflected sound.

Figure 20.7
Special spongy walls absorb rather than reflect sound in this acoustical quiet room.

It is often advantageous to place highly reflective surfaces behind the stage to direct sound out to an audience. Reflecting surfaces are suspended above the stage in some concert halls. Most often they are large, shiny, plastic surfaces that also reflect light (Figure 20.8). A listener can look up at these reflectors and see the reflected images of the members of the orchestra. The plastic reflectors are somewhat curved, which increases the field of view. Both sound and light obey the same law of reflection, so if a reflector is oriented so that you can see a particular musical instrument, rest assured that you will hear it also. Sound from the instrument will follow the line of sight to the reflector and then to you.

Figure 20.8
The plastic plates above the orchestra reflect both light and sound. Adjusting them is quite simple: What you see is what you hear.

SCREENCAST: Reflection and Refraction of Sound
