Section 3.3 Velocity

When we know both the speed and the direction of motion for an object, we know its velocity. Velocity combines the ideas of speed and direction of motion. For example, if a car travels at 60 km/h, we know its speed. But if we say the car moves at 60 km/h to the north, we specify its velocity. Speed is a description of how fast; velocity is how fast and in what direction. A quantity such as velocity that specifies direction as well as magnitude is called a vector quantity. Recall from Chapter 2 that force is a vector quantity, requiring both magnitude and direction for its description. Likewise, velocity is a vector quantity. In contrast, a quantity that requires only magnitude for a description is called a scalar quantity. Speed is a scalar quantity.

VIDEO: Velocity
VIDEO: Changing Velocity

Velocity is "directed" speed.

Constant Velocity
Constant speed means steady speed. Something with constant speed doesn't speed up or slow down. Constant velocity, on the other hand, means both constant speed and constant direction. Constant direction is a straight line--the object's path doesn't curve. So constant velocity means motion in a straight line at a constant speed.

Changing Velocity
If either the speed or the direction changes (or if both change), then the velocity changes. A car on a curved track, for example, may have a constant speed, but, because its direction is changing, its velocity is not constant. We'll see in the next section that it is accelerating.

Figure 3.3
The car on the circular track may have a constant speed, but its velocity is changing every instant. Why?

SCREENCAST: Bikes-and-Bee Problem
SCREENCAST: Unit Conversion

Check Point
1. "She moves at a constant speed in a constant direction." Rephrase the same sentence in fewer words.
2. The speedometer of a car moving to the east reads 100 km/h. The car passes another car that is moving to the west at 100 km/h. Do both cars have the same speed? Do they have the same velocity?
3. During a certain period of time, the speedometer of a car reads a constant 60 km/h. Does this indicate a constant speed? A constant velocity?

Check Your Answers
1. "She moves at a constant velocity."
2. Both cars have the same speed, but they have opposite velocities because they are moving in opposite directions.
3. The constant speedometer reading indicates a constant speed but not a constant velocity, because the car may not be moving along a straight-line path, in which case it is accelerating.
