Chapter 20 Review - Sound
Source: textbook pages 387-388, from the uploaded/trimmed Conceptual Physics PDF.

SUMMARY OF TERMS (KNOWLEDGE)
Pitch The highness or lowness of a tone; related to wave frequency.
Infrasonic Describes a sound that has a frequency too low to be heard by the normal human ear.
Ultrasonic Describes a sound that has a frequency too high to be heard by the normal human ear.
Compression A condensed region of the medium through which a longitudinal wave travels.
Rarefaction A rarefied (of reduced pressure) region of the medium through which a longitudinal wave travels.
Reverberation The persistence of sound, as in an echo, due to multiple reflections.
Refraction The bending of sound or any wave caused by a difference in wave speeds.
Forced vibration The setting up of vibrations in an object by a vibrating force.
Natural frequency The frequency at which an elastic object tends to vibrate when it is disturbed and the disturbing force is removed.
Resonance The response of a body when a forcing frequency matches its natural frequency.
Interference A result of superposing different waves, often of the same wavelength. Constructive interference results from crest-to-crest reinforcement; destructive interference results from crest-to-trough cancellation.
Beats A series of alternate reinforcements and cancellations produced by the interference of two waves of slightly different frequencies, heard as a throbbing effect in sound waves.

READING CHECK QUESTIONS (COMPREHENSION)
20.1 Nature of Sound
1. How does sound relate to energy?
2. What is the relationship between frequency and pitch?
3. What is the average range of a young person's hearing?
4. Distinguish between infrasonic and ultrasonic sound waves.
5. Relative to solids and liquids, how does air rank as a conductor of sound?
6. Why doesn't sound travel in a vacuum?

20.2 Sound in Air
7. Distinguish between a compression and a rarefaction.
8. Do compressions and rarefactions travel in the same direction, or in opposite directions, in a wave?
9. What factors does the speed of sound depend upon? What are some factors that it does not depend upon?
10. What is the speed of sound in dry air at 20 degrees C?
11. Does sound travel faster in warm air than in cold air?
12. Which is normally greater: the energy in ordinary sound or the energy in ordinary light?
13. What ultimately becomes of the energy of sound in the air?

20.3 Reflection of Sound
14. What is an echo?
15. What is a reverberation?

20.4 Refraction of Sound
16. What is the cause of refraction?
17. Does sound tend to bend upward or downward when its speed is less near the ground?
18. Why does sound sometimes refract under water?
19. What is ultrasound?

20.5 Forced Vibrations
20. Why does a struck tuning fork sound louder when it is held against a table?
21. Give at least two factors that determine the natural frequency of an object.

20.6 Resonance
22. How do forced vibrations relate to resonance?
23. When you listen to a radio, why do you hear only one station at a time rather than hearing all stations at once?
24. How did wind-generated resonance affect the Tacoma Narrows Bridge in Washington in 1940?

20.7 Interference
25. When is it possible for one wave to cancel another?
26. What kind of waves can exhibit interference?
27. What is the result of a mirror image of a sound signal combining with the sound itself?

20.8 Beats
28. What physical phenomenon underlies the production of beats?
29. What beat frequency will occur when a 370-Hz and a 374-Hz sound source are sounded together?
30. How does a radio wave differ from a sound wave?

THINK AND DO (HANDS-ON APPLICATION)
31. In the bathtub, submerge your head and listen to the sound you make when you click your fingernails together or tap the tub beneath the water surface. Compare the sound you make when both the source and your ears are above the water. At the risk of getting the floor wet, slide back and forth in the tub at different frequencies and see how the amplitude of the sloshing waves quickly builds up when you slide in rhythm with the waves. (The latter project is most effective when you are alone in the tub.)
32. Stretch a piece of balloon rubber not too tightly over a radio loudspeaker. Glue a small, very lightweight piece of mirror, aluminum foil, or polished metal near one edge. Project a narrow beam of light on the mirror while your favorite music is playing and observe the beautiful patterns that are reflected on a screen or wall.
