Section 2.4: Net Force and Vectors
Source PDF: ~CP_Curriculum_Sections(2).pdf
Textbook pages used: 28-30 (PDF pages 12-14)

SCREENCAST: Net Force Vectors
video: Definition of a Newton

Changes in motion are produced by a force or combination of forces (in the next chapter we’ll refer to changes in motion as acceleration). A force, in the simplest sense, is a push or a pull. Its source may be gravitational, electrical, magnetic, or simply muscular effort. When more than a single force acts on an object, we consider the net force. For example, if you and a friend pull in the same direction with equal forces on an object, the forces combine to produce a net force twice as great as your single force. If you both pull with equal forces in opposite directions, the net force is zero. The equal but oppositely directed forces cancel each other. One of the forces can be considered to be the negative of the other, and they add algebraically to zero, with a resulting net force of zero.

Figure 2.6 shows how forces combine to produce a net force. A pair of 5-newton forces in the same direction produce a net force of 10 newtons (the newton, N, is the scientific unit of force). If the 5-newton forces are in opposite directions, the net force is zero. If 10 newtons of force is exerted to the right and 5 newtons to the left, the net force is 5 newtons to the right. The forces are shown by arrows. When the length and direction of such arrows are drawn to scale, we refer to the arrow as a vector.

Figure 2.6
Net force (a force of 5 N is about 1.1 lb).

Any quantity that requires both magnitude and direction for a complete description is a vector quantity (Figure 2.7). Examples of vector quantities include force, velocity, and acceleration. By contrast, a quantity that can be described by magnitude only, not involving direction, is called a scalar quantity. Mass, volume, and speed are scalar quantities.

Figure 2.7
This vector, scaled so that 1 cm equals 20 N, represents a force of 60 N to the right.

The valentine vector says, “I was only a scalar until you came along and gave me direction.”

Adding vectors that act along parallel directions is simple enough: If they act in the same direction, they add; if they act in opposite directions, they subtract. The sum of two or more vectors is called their resultant. To find the resultant of two vectors that don’t act in exactly the same or opposite direction, we use the parallelogram rule.4 Construct a parallelogram in which the two vectors are adjacent sides—the diagonal of the parallelogram shows the resultant. In Figure 2.8, the parallelograms are rectangles.

Figure 2.8
The pair of vectors at right angles to each other make two sides of a rectangle, the diagonal of which is their resultant.

In the special case of two vectors that are equal in magnitude and perpendicular to each other, the parallelogram is a square (Figure 2.9). Since for any square the length of a diagonal is √2, or 1.41, times one of the sides, the resultant is √2 times one of the vectors. For example, the resultant of two equal vectors of magnitude 100 acting at a right angle to each other is 141.

Figure 2.9
When a pair of equal-length vectors at right angles to each other are added, they form a square. The diagonal of the square is the resultant, √2 times the length of either side.

Force Vectors

Figure 2.10 shows a pair of forces acting on a box. One is 30 newtons and the other is 40 newtons. Simple measurement shows that the resultant of this pair of forces is 50 newtons.

Figure 2.10
The resultant of the 30-N and 40-N forces is 50 N.

Figure 2.11 shows Nellie Newton hanging at rest from a clothesline. Note that the clothesline acts like a pair of ropes that make different angles with the vertical. The three steps show there are three forces acting on Nellie: her weight, a tension in the left-hand side of the rope, and a tension in the right-hand side of the rope. Because of the different angles, different rope tensions will occur in each side. Because Nellie hangs in equilibrium, the two rope tensions must add vectorially to be equal and opposite to her weight. Which side has the greater tension? The parallelogram rule shows that the tension in the right-hand rope is greater than the tension in the left-hand rope. If you measure the vectors, you’ll see that the tension in the right rope is about twice the tension in the left rope. Both rope tensions combine to support Nellie’s weight.

Figure 2.11
(a) The force due to gravity on Nellie is shown by the downward vertical vector. An equal and opposite vector is needed for equilibrium, shown by the dashed vector. (b) This dashed vector is the diagonal of a parallelogram defined by the green lines. (c) Both rope tensions are shown by the constructed vectors. Tension is greater in the right rope, the one more likely to break.

Figure 2.12
Diana Lininger Markham illustrates the vector arrangement of Figure 2.11.

SCREENCAST: Nellie’s Rope Tension
SCREENCAST: Nellie’s Ropes

4 A parallelogram is a four-sided figure with opposite sides parallel to each other. Usually, you determine the length of the diagonal by measurement, but in the special case in which the two vectors X and Y are perpendicular (a square or a rectangle), you can apply the Pythagorean theorem, R² = X² + Y², to find the resultant: R = √(X² + Y²).

More about force vectors can be found in Appendix D at the end of this book and in the Practicing Physics book. In the next chapter we’ll discuss velocity vectors.
