20.2 Sound in Air

When we clap our hands, the sound produced is nonperiodic. It consists of a wave pulse that travels outward in all directions. To better understand how a pulse moves in air, consider a long room, as shown in Figure 20.1a. At one end is an open window with a curtain over it. At the other end is a door. When we open the door, we can imagine the door pushing the molecules next to it away from their initial positions and into their neighbors. The neighboring molecules, in turn, push into their neighbors, and so on, like a compression traveling along a spring, until the curtain flaps out the window. A pulse of compressed air has moved from the door to the curtain. This pulse of compressed air is called a compression.

When we close the door, as in Figure 20.1b, the door pushes some air molecules out of the room. This produces an area of low pressure behind the door. Neighboring molecules then move into it, leaving a zone of lower pressure behind them. We say this zone of lower-pressure air is rarefied. Other molecules farther away from the door, in turn, move into these rarefied regions, and a disturbance again travels across the room. This is evidenced by the curtain, which flaps inward. This time the disturbance is a rarefaction.

As with all wave motion, it is not the medium itself that travels across the room but the energy-carrying pulse. In both compression and rarefaction, the pulse travels from the door to the curtain. We know this because, in both cases, the curtain moves after the door is opened or closed. If you continually swing the door open and closed in periodic fashion, you can set up a wave of periodic compressions and rarefactions that will cause the curtain to swing in and out of the window. On a much smaller but more rapid scale, this is what happens when a tuning fork is struck. The periodic vibrations of the tuning fork and the waves produced are considerably higher in frequency and lower in amplitude than those caused by the swinging door. You don’t notice the effect of sound waves on the curtain, but you are well aware of them when they meet your sensitive eardrums.

Consider sound waves in the tube shown in Figure 20.2. For simplicity, only the waves that travel in the tube are depicted. When the prong of the tuning fork next to the tube moves toward the tube, a compression enters the tube. When the prong swings away in the opposite direction, a rarefaction follows the compression. It’s like a Ping-Pong paddle moving to and fro in a room packed with Ping-Pong balls. As the source vibrates, a periodic series of compressions and rarefactions is produced. The frequency of the vibrating source and the frequency of the wave it produces are the same.

Pause to reflect on the physics of sound while you are listening to your radio sometime. The radio loudspeaker is a paper cone that vibrates in rhythm with an electrical signal. Air molecules next to the vibrating cone of the speaker are themselves set into vibration. This air, in turn, vibrates against neighboring particles, which, in turn, do the same, and so on. As a result, rhythmic patterns of compressed and rarefied air emanate from the loudspeaker, showering the whole room with undulating motions. The same process occurs with the bud earphones used with your iPod or other device in which the speaker is small enough to fit in your ear. The resulting vibrating air sets your eardrum into vibration, which, in turn, sends cascades of rhythmic electrical impulses along the cochlea nerve canal and into the brain. And you listen to the sound of music.

Loudspeaker
The loudspeaker of your radio or other sound-producing systems changes electrical signals into sound waves. The electrical signals pass through a coil wound around the neck of a paper cone. This coil, which acts as an electromagnet, is located near a permanent magnet. When current flows one way, magnetic force pushes the electromagnet toward the permanent magnet, pulling the cone inward. When current flows in the opposite direction, the cone is pushed outward. Vibrations in the electrical signal cause the cone to vibrate. Vibrations of the cone then produce sound waves in the air. The physics of large loudspeakers applies to small ones, even those that fit in your ear.

Speed of Sound in Air
If we watch a person at a distance chopping wood, or see a faraway baseball player hitting a ball, we can easily see that the blow takes place an appreciable time before its sound reaches our ears. Likewise, thunder is heard after we see a flash of lightning. These common experiences show that sound requires a recognizable time to travel from one place to another. The speed of sound depends on wind conditions, temperature, and humidity. It does not depend on the loudness or the frequency of the sound; all sounds in the same medium travel at the same speed. The speed of sound in dry air at 0°C is about 330 meters per second, nearly 1200 kilometers per hour (a little more than one-millionth the speed of light). Water vapor in the air increases this speed slightly. Sound travels faster through warm air than cold air. This is to be expected because the faster-moving molecules in warm air bump into one another more often and therefore can transmit a pulse in less time. For each degree rise in temperature above 0°C, the speed of sound in air increases by 0.6 meter per second. So, in air at a normal room temperature of about 20°C, sound travels at about 340 meters per second.

Footnote: The speed of sound in a gas is about 3/4 the average speed of the gas molecules.

Your two ears are so sensitive to the differences in sound reaching them that you can tell from what direction a sound is coming with almost pinpoint accuracy. With only one ear, you would have no idea (and, in an emergency, might not know which way to jump).

Practicing Physics
Suspend the wire grille from a refrigerator or oven from a string, and hold the ends of the string to your ears. Let a friend gently stroke the grille with pieces of broom straw and with other objects. The effect is best appreciated when you are in a relaxed condition with your eyes closed. Be sure to try this!

Check Point
1. Do compressions and rarefactions in a sound wave travel in the same direction or in opposite directions from one another?
2. What is the approximate distance of a thunderstorm when you note a 3-s delay between the flash of lightning and the sound of thunder?

Check Your Answers
1. They travel in the same direction (as is shown in Figure 20.1).
2. Assuming that the speed of sound in air is about 340 m/s, in 3 s it will travel 340 m/s × 3 s = 1020 m. There is no appreciable delay for the flash, so the storm is slightly more than 1 km away.

Energy in Sound Waves
Wave motion of all kinds possesses energy of varying degrees. Electromagnetic waves from the Sun, for instance, bring us the enormous quantities of energy that sustain life on Earth. By comparison, sound has an extremely small amount of energy. That’s because producing sound requires only a small amount of energy. For example, 10 million people talking at the same time would produce sound energy equal only to the energy needed to operate a common flashlight. Hearing is possible only because of our remarkably sensitive ears. Only the most sensitive microphone can detect sound that is softer than what we can hear.

Sound energy dissipates to thermal energy while sound travels in air. For waves of higher frequency, the sound energy is transformed into internal energy more rapidly than for waves of lower frequencies. As a result, sounds of low frequencies travel farther through air than sounds of higher frequencies. That’s why the foghorns of ships have a low frequency.
