7.5 Conservation of Energy

More important than knowing what energy is is understanding how it behaves—how it transforms. We can better understand the processes and changes that occur in nature if we analyze them in terms of energy changes—transformations from one form into another—or of transfers from one location to another. Energy is nature’s way of keeping score.

Margin note: Inventors take heed: When introducing a new idea, first be sure it is in the context of what is presently known. For example, any new idea should be consistent with the conservation of energy.

Consider the changes in energy in the operation of the pile driver back in Figure 7.7. Work done to raise the ram, giving it potential energy, becomes kinetic energy when the ram is released. This energy transfers to the piling below. The distance the piling penetrates into the ground multiplied by the average force of impact—which is the work done on the pile—is ideally equal to the initial potential energy of the ram. Taking all heat and sound energy into account, we find that energy transforms without net loss or net gain. Quite remarkable!

Screencast: Conservation of Energy

The study of various forms of energy and their transformations from one form into another has led to one of the greatest generalizations in physics—the law of conservation of energy:

Energy cannot be created or destroyed; it may be transformed from one form into another, but the total amount of energy never changes.

When we consider any system in its entirety, whether it be as simple as a swinging pendulum or as complex as an exploding supernova, there is one quantity that isn’t created or destroyed: energy. Energy may change form or it may simply be transferred from one place to another, but, as scientists have learned, the total energy score stays the same. This energy score takes into account the fact that the atoms that make up matter are themselves concentrated bundles of energy. When the nuclei (cores) of atoms rearrange themselves, enormous amounts of energy can be released. The Sun shines because some of this nuclear energy is transformed into radiant energy.

Figure 7.14 Cable cars on the steep hills of San Francisco nicely transfer energy to one another via the cable beneath the street. The cable forms a complete loop that connects cars going both downhill and uphill. In this way a car moving downhill does work on a car moving uphill. So, the increased gravitational PE of an uphill car is due to the decreased gravitational PE of a car moving downhill.

Enormous compression due to gravity and extremely high temperatures in the deep interior of the Sun fuse the nuclei of hydrogen atoms together to form helium nuclei. This is thermonuclear fusion, a process that releases radiant energy, a small part of which reaches Earth. Part of the energy reaching Earth falls on plants (and on other photosynthetic organisms), and part of this, in turn, is later stored in the form of coal. Another part supports life in the food chain that begins with plants (and other photosynthesizers), and part of this energy later is stored in oil. Part of the Sun’s energy goes into the evaporation of water from the ocean, and part of this returns to Earth in rain that may be trapped behind a dam. By virtue of its elevated position, the water behind a dam has energy that may be used to power a generating plant below, where it will be transformed into electric energy. The energy travels through wires to homes, where it is used for lighting, heating, cooking, and operating electrical gadgets. How wonderful that energy transforms from one form into another!

Figure 7.15 A circus diver at the top of a pole has a PE of 10,000 J. As he dives, his PE converts to KE. Note that, at successive positions one-fourth, one-half, three-fourths, and all the way down, the total energy is constant.

Energy and Technology
Try to imagine life before energy was something that humans controlled. Imagine home life without electric lights, refrigerators, heating and cooling systems, the telephone, and the electronic devices we rely on—not to mention the family automobile. We may romanticize a better life without these, but only if we overlook the hours of daily toil devoted to doing laundry, cooking, and heating our homes. We’d also have to overlook how difficult it was to get a doctor in times of emergency before the advent of the telephone—when a doctor had little more in his bag than laxatives, aspirins, and sugar pills—and when infant death rates were staggering.

We have become so accustomed to the benefits of technology that we are only faintly aware of our dependence on dams, power plants, mass transportation, electrification, modern medicine, and modern agricultural science for our very existence. When we dig into a good meal, we give little thought to the technology that went into growing, harvesting, and delivering the food on our table. When we turn on a light, we give little thought to the centrally controlled power grid that links the widely separated power stations by long-distance transmission lines. These lines serve as the productive arteries of industry, transportation, and the electrification of our society. Anyone who thinks of science and technology as “inhuman” fails to grasp the ways in which they make our lives more human.

Circus Physics
Acrobat Art of mass m stands on the left end of a seesaw. Acrobat Bart of mass M jumps from a height h onto the right end of the seesaw, thus propelling Art into the air.
(a) Neglecting inefficiencies, how does the PE of Art at the top of his trajectory compare with the PE of Bart just before Bart jumps?
(b) Show that ideally Art reaches a height (M/m)h.
(c) If Art’s mass is 40 kg, Bart’s mass is 70 kg, and the height of the initial jump was 4 m, show that Art rises a vertical distance of 7 m.
Solution
(a) Neglecting inefficiencies, the entire initial PE of Bart before he drops goes into the PE of Art rising to his peak—that is, at Art’s moment of zero KE.
(b) PEBart = PEArt; MghBart = mghArt; hArt = (M/m)h.
(c) hArt = (M/m)h = (70 kg/40 kg)4 m = 7 m.

Screencast: Energy of Acrobats
Screencast: Ballistic Pendulum

Check Point
1. Does an automobile consume more fuel when its air conditioner is turned on? When its lights are on? When its radio is on while the motor is turned off in the parking lot?
2. Does the electric power that is generated from wind-powered generators affect the speed of the wind? That is, would locations behind the wind generators be windier if the generators weren’t there?

Check Your Answers
1. The answer to all three questions is yes because all the energy consumed ultimately comes from the fuel. Even the energy taken from the battery must be given back to the battery by the alternator, which is turned by the engine, which runs from the energy of the fuel. There’s no free lunch!
2. Wind-powered generators subtract KE from the wind, so the wind is slowed by interaction with the blades. So, yes, it would be windier behind the wind generators if they weren’t there.

Recycled Energy
Recycled energy is reused energy that otherwise would be wasted. A typical fossil-fuel–fired power plant discards about two-thirds of the energy present in fuel as wasted thermal energy. Only about one-third of the energy input is converted to useful electricity. What other business throws away two-thirds of its input? This was not always so. Thomas Edison’s early power plants in the late 1880s converted much more input energy to useful purposes than today’s electric-only power plants. Edison used the cast-off heat from his generators to warm nearby homes and factories. The company he founded still delivers heat to thousands of Manhattan buildings via the largest commercial steam system in the world. New York is not alone: Most homes in the region around Copenhagen, Denmark, are warmed by heat from power plants. More than half the energy used in Denmark is recycled energy. In contrast, recycled energy in the United States amounts to less than 10% of all energy used. A principal reason is that power plants are now typically built far from buildings that would benefit from recycled energy. Nevertheless, we can’t continue to throw heat energy into the sky in one place and then burn more fossil fuel to supply heat somewhere else. Watch for more energy recycling.
