24.6 Electromagnets

A current-carrying coil of wire is an electromagnet. The strength of an electromagnet is increased by simply increasing the current through the coil and the number of turns in the coil. Industrial magnets gain additional strength by having a piece of iron within the coil. Electromagnets powerful enough to lift automobiles are a common sight in junkyards. Magnetic domains in the iron core are induced into alignment, adding to the field. For extremely strong electromagnets, such as those used to control charged-particle beams in high-energy accelerators, iron is not used because, beyond a certain point, all of its domains are aligned. The magnet is said to be saturated, and increasing the electric current flowing around the core no longer affects the magnetization of the core itself and it no longer adds to the field.

Figure 24.10
Iron filings sprinkled on paper reveal the magnetic field configurations about (a) a current-carrying wire, (b) a current-carrying loop, and (c) a current-carrying coil of loops.

Figure 24.11
A magnetically levitated vehicle--a magplane. Whereas conventional trains vibrate as they ride on rails at high speeds, magplanes can travel vibration-free at high speeds because they levitate above the guideway.

Electromagnets need not have iron cores. Electromagnets without iron cores are used in magnetically levitated, or “maglev,” transportation. Figure 24.11 shows a maglev train, which has no diesel or other conventional engine. Maglev trains are already operating in China and Japan, and various designs are still being engineered. In one design already in commercial use, levitation is accomplished by magnetic coils that run along the track, called a guideway. The coils repel large magnets on the train’s undercarriage. Once the train is levitated a few centimeters, power is supplied to the coils within the guideway walls that propels the train. This is accomplished by continually alternating the electric current fed to the coils, which continually alternates their magnetic polarity. In this way a magnetic field pulls the vehicle forward, while a magnetic field farther back pushes forward. The alternating pushes and pulls produce a forward thrust. Since maglev trains float on a cushion of air, the friction that accompanies conventional trains is eliminated. Maglev speeds, about half the speed of commercial aircraft, are limited only by air friction and passenger comfort. Watch for expansion of this growing technology.

Superconducting Electromagnets

The most powerful electromagnets without iron cores use superconducting coils through which large electric currents flow with ease. Recall from Chapter 22 that there is no electrical resistance in a superconductor to limit the flow of electric charge and, therefore, no heating, even if the current is enormous. Electromagnets that utilize superconducting coils produce extremely strong magnetic fields—and they do so very economically because there is no heat loss (although energy is used to keep the superconductors cold). At the Large Hadron Collider in Geneva, Switzerland, superconducting magnets guide high-energy particles around an accelerator 17 miles in circumference. Superconducting magnets are used in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) devices in hospitals.

Figure 24.12
A permanent magnet levitates above a superconductor because its magnetic field cannot penetrate the superconducting material.

Whether superconducting or not, electromagnets are part of everyday life. They’re in sound systems, in electric motors, in our automobiles, and even in shredded garbage recycling systems to remove metal bits. Cheers for electromagnets.
