6.2 Impulse

If the momentum of an object changes, then either the mass or the velocity or both change. If the mass remains unchanged, as is most often the case, then the velocity changes and acceleration occurs. What produces acceleration? We know the answer is force. The greater the net force acting on an object, the greater its change in velocity in a given time interval and, hence, the greater its change in momentum.

But something else is important in changing momentum: time--how long a time the force acts. If you apply a brief force to a stalled automobile, you produce a change in its momentum. Apply the same force over an extended period of time, and you produce a greater change in the automobile's momentum. A force sustained for a long time produces more change in momentum than does the same force applied briefly. So, both force and time interval are important in changing momentum.

The quantity force × time interval is called impulse. In shorthand notation,
Impulse = Ft

Figure 6.3
When you push with the same force for twice the time, you impart twice the impulse and produce twice the change in momentum.

Timing is important especially when you're changing your momentum.

CHECK POINT
1. Which has more momentum: a 1-ton car moving at 100 km/h or a 2-ton truck moving at 50 km/h?
2. Does a moving object have impulse?
3. Does a moving object have momentum?
4. For the same force, which cannon imparts a greater impulse to a cannonball: a long cannon or a short one?

Check Your Answers
1. Both have the same momentum (1 ton × 100 km/h = 2 ton × 50 km/h).
2. No, impulse is not something an object has, like momentum. Impulse is what an object can provide or what it can experience when it interacts with some other object. An object cannot possess impulse just as it cannot possess force.
3. Yes, but, like velocity, in a relative sense--that is, with respect to a frame of reference, usually Earth's surface. The momentum possessed by a moving object with respect to a stationary point on Earth may be quite different from the momentum it possesses with respect to another moving object.
4. The long cannon imparts a greater impulse because the force acts over a longer time. (A greater impulse produces a greater change in momentum, so a long cannon imparts more speed to a cannonball than a short cannon.)
