20.8 Beats

When two tones of slightly different frequency are sounded together, a fluctuation in the loudness of the combined sounds is heard; the sound is loud, then faint, then loud, then faint, and so on. This periodic variation in the loudness of sound is called beats and is due to interference. Strike two slightly mismatched tuning forks and, because one fork vibrates at a different frequency than the other, the vibrations of the forks will be momentarily in step, then out of step, then in again, and so on. When the combined waves reach our ears in step—say, when a compression from one fork overlaps a compression from the other—the sound is a maximum. A moment later, when the forks are out of step, a compression from one fork is met with a rarefaction from the other, resulting in a minimum. The sound that reaches our ears throbs between maximum and minimum loudness and produces a tremolo effect.

video: Interference and Beats

Figure 20.21 The interference of two sound sources of slightly different frequencies produces beats.

We can understand beats by considering a tall rabbit and short rabbit hopping side by side. The short rabbit covers less ground in each hop, so it has to hop more rapidly—that is, with a higher frequency—to keep up with the tall rabbit. If the rabbits are “in sync” at a particular moment, landing together, then a little later they will be “out of sync,” landing at slightly different times. How long until they are back in sync? Imagine that the tall rabbit makes 70 hops in 1 minute, and the shorter rabbit makes 72 hops in the same time. After 6 seconds (0.1 min) they will have made 7.0 and 7.2 hops, respectively, and will not be in sync. Not until 30 seconds (0.5 min) have gone by, when they have made, respectively, 35 and 36 hops (an integral number for both), will they again land together. Then, after 1 min (70 and 72 hops), they will again be back in sync. And so on. Twice per minute the rabbits will be in sync. In general, if two creatures with different hopping rates travel together, the number of times they are in sync each minute (or other unit of time) will be equal to the difference in the frequencies of their hops. This idea applies also to the pair of tuning forks. If one fork undergoes 264 vibrations each second and the other fork vibrates 262 times per second, then they will vibrate in sync and reinforce each other twice each second. A beat frequency of 2 hertz will be heard. (The overall tone will correspond to the average frequency, 263 hertz.)

Figure 20.22 The unequal spacings of the combs produce a moiré pattern that is similar to beats.

If we overlap two combs with different teeth spacing, we’ll see a moiré pattern that is related to beats (Figure 20.22). The number of beats per length will equal the difference in the number of teeth per length for the two combs.

Beats can occur with any kind of wave and provide a practical way to compare frequencies. To tune a piano, for example, a piano tuner listens for beats produced between a standard frequency and the frequency of a particular string on the piano. When the frequencies are identical, the beats disappear. Beats can help you tune a variety of musical instruments. Simply listen for beats between the tone of your instrument and a standard tone produced by a piano or some other instrument.

Radio Broadcasts

A radio receiver turns electromagnetic waves, which we cannot hear, into sound waves that we can hear. Every radio station has an assigned frequency at which it broadcasts. The electromagnetic wave transmitted at this frequency is the carrier wave. The relatively low-frequency sound signal to be communicated is superimposed on the much higher-frequency carrier wave in two principal ways: by slight variations in amplitude that match the audio frequency or by slight variations in frequency. This impression of the sound wave on the higher-frequency radio wave is modulation. When the amplitude of the carrier wave is modulated, we call it AM, or amplitude modulation. AM stations broadcast in the range of 535–1605 kilohertz. When the frequency of the carrier wave is modulated, we call it FM, or frequency modulation. FM stations broadcast in the higher-frequency range of 88–108 megahertz. Amplitude modulation is similar to rapidly changing the brightness of a constant-color lightbulb. Frequency modulation is similar to rapidly changing the color of a constant-intensity lightbulb.

Turning the knob of a radio receiver to select a particular station is like adjusting movable masses on the prongs of a tuning fork to make it resonate to the sound produced by another fork. In choosing a radio station, you adjust the frequency of an electric circuit inside the radio receiver to match and resonate with the frequency of the desired station. You sort out one carrier wave from many. Then the impressed sound signal is separated from the carrier wave, amplified, and fed to the loudspeaker. It’s nice to hear only one station at a time!

Figure 20.23 AM and FM radio signals. (a) Sound waves that enter a microphone. (b) Radio-frequency carrier wave produced by a transmitter without a sound signal. (c) Carrier wave modulated by signal. (d) Static interference. (e) Carrier wave and signal affected by static. (f) Radio receiver cuts out negative half of carrier wave. (g) Signal remaining is rough for AM because of static but is smooth for FM because the tips of the waveform are clipped without loss to the signal.

Beats are utilized by dolphins in surveying the motions of things around them. When a dolphin sends out sound signals, beats may be produced when the echoes the dolphin receives interfere with the sounds it sends. When there is no relative motion between the dolphin and the object returning the sound, the sending and receiving frequencies are the same and no beats occur. But when there is relative motion, the echo has a different frequency due to the Doppler effect, and beats are produced when the echo and the emitted sound combine. The same principle is applied by the radar guns used by police officers. The beats between the signal that is sent and the one that is reflected are used to determine the speed of a car.

Why does Hollywood persist in playing engine noises whenever a spacecraft in outer space passes by? Wouldn’t seeing them float by silently be far more dramatic?

An intriguing and life-saving application of beats is used in the detection of dangerous gases in mines. The air in some mines contains poisonous methane. There’s a slight difference in the speeds of sound in pure air and in air that contains methane. When a pair of small identical pipes are blown together, one by pure air from a reservoir and the other by the air in the mine, beats are heard if the air contains methane. If you work in a mine, do so in one where beats are not heard when this procedure is done!

Check Point
1. What is the beat frequency when a 262-Hz tuning fork and a 266-Hz tuning fork are sounded together? A 262-Hz fork and a 272-Hz fork?
2. Is it correct to say that, in every case, without exception, any radio wave travels faster than any sound wave?

Check Your Answers
1. For the 262-Hz and 266-Hz forks, the ear will hear 264 Hz, which will beat at 4 Hz (266 Hz – 262 Hz). For the 262-Hz and 272-Hz forks, 267 Hz will be heard, and some people will hear it throb 10 times each second (272 Hz – 262 Hz). Beat frequencies higher than 10 Hz are normally too rapid to be heard.
2. Yes, because any radio wave is an electromagnetic wave and travels at the speed of light. A sound wave, on the other hand, is a mechanical wave that travels in air at about 340 m/s, about one-millionth the speed of a radio wave. So any radio wave travels appreciably faster than any sound wave.
