26.6

Seeing Light—The Eye

Light is the only thing we see with the most remarkable optical instrument
known—the eye (Figure 26.16). As light enters the eye, it moves through the
Retina
transparent cover called the cornea, which does about 70% of the necessary bendLens
ing of the light before it passes through an opening in the iris (colored part of the
Fovea
eye). The opening is called the pupil. The light then reaches the crystalline lens,
which fine-tunes the focusing of light that passes through a gelatinous fluid called
Blind spot
the vitreous humor. Light then passes to the retina.
Iris
The retina covers the back two-thirds of the eye and is responsible for the
F i g u r e 2 6 .1 6
wide field of vision that we experience. For clear vision, light must focus diThe human eye.
rectly on the retina. When light focuses in front of or behind the retina, vision is blurry. Until very recently, the retina was more sensitive to light than
any artificial detector ever made. The retina is not uniform. In the middle
is the macula, and a small depression in the center is the fovea, the region of
most distinct vision. Behind the retina is the optic nerve,
which transmits signals from the photoreceptor cells to
the brain.
Much greater detail can be seen at the fovea than
at the side parts of the eye. There is also a spot in the
retina where the nerves carrying all the information
exit along the optic nerve; this is the blind spot. You can
demonstrate that you have a blind spot in each eye if
you hold this book at arm’s length, close your left eye,
and look at Figure 26.17 with your right eye only. You
can see both the round dot and the X at this distance.
If you now move the book slowly toward your face, with
F i g u r e 2 6 .1 7
The blind-spot experiment. Close your left eye and look with
your right eye fixed upon the dot, you’ll reach a position
your right eye at the round dot. Adjust your distance and find
about 20–25 cm from your eye where the X disappears.
the blind spot that erases the X. Switch eyes and look at the
Now repeat this exercise with only the left eye open,
X and the dot disappears. Does your brain fill in crossed lines
looking this time at the X, and the dot will disappear.
where the dot was?
When you look with both eyes open, you are not aware
of the blind spot, mainly because one eye “fills in” the part to which the other
eye is blind. Amazingly, the brain fills in the “expected” view even with one
eye open. Repeat the exercise of Figure 26.17 with small objects on various
backgrounds. Note that, instead of seeing nothing, your brain gratuitously
fills in the appropriate background. So you not only see what’s there—you
also see what’s not there!
The retina is composed of tiny antennae that resonate to the incoming light.
There are two basic kinds of antennae, the rods and the cones (Figure 26.18). As
the names imply, some of the antennae are rod-shaped and some cone-shaped.
The rods predominate toward the periphery of the retina, while the cones are
denser toward the fovea. Rods handle vision in low light, and cones handle color
vision and detail. There are three types of cones: those that are stimulated by
low-frequency light, those that are stimulated by light of intermediate frequencies, and those that are stimulated by light of higher frequencies. The cones are
very dense in the fovea itself, and, since they are packed so tightly, they are much
finer or narrower there than elsewhere in the retina. We see color most acutely
by focusing an image on the fovea, where there are no rods. Primates and a species of ground squirrel are the only mammals that have all three types of cones
and experience full color vision. The retinas of other mammals consist primarily
F i g u r e 2 6 .1 8
Magnified view of the rods and cones of rods, which are sensitive to only lightness or darkness, like a black-and-white
photograph or movie.
in the human eye.
Cornea

CHAP TER 26

In the human eye, the number of cones decreases as we move away from the
fovea. It’s interesting that the color of an object disappears if it is viewed on the
periphery of the visual field. This can be tested by having a friend enter your periphery of vision with some brightly colored objects. You will find that you can see
the objects before you can see what color they are.
Another interesting observation is that the periphery of the retina is very
sensitive to motion. Although our vision is poor from the corner of our eye, we
are sensitive to anything moving there. We are “wired” to look for something
jiggling to the side of our visual field, a feature that must have been important in our evolutionary development. So have your friend shake those brightly
colored objects when she brings them into the periphery of your vision. If you
can just barely see the objects when they shake, but not at all when they’re stationary, then you won’t be able to tell what color they are (Figure 26.19). Try
it and see!
Another distinguishing feature of the rods and cones is the intensity of light
to which they respond. The cones require more energy than the rods before
they will “fire” an impulse through the nervous system. If the intensity of light
is very low, the things we see have no color. We see low intensities with our
rods. Dark-adapted vision is almost entirely due to the rods, while vision in
bright light is due to the cones. Stars, for example, look white to us. Yet most
stars are actually brightly colored. A time exposure of the stars with a camera
reveals reds and red-oranges for the “cooler” stars and blues and blue-violets for
the “hotter” stars. The starlight is too weak, however, to fire the color-perceiving cones in the retina. So we see the stars with our rods and perceive them as
white or, at best, only faintly colored. Females have a slightly lower threshold
of firing for the cones, however, and can see a bit more color than males. So
if she says she sees colored stars and he says she doesn’t, she is probably right!
We find that the rods “see” better than the cones toward the blue end of the
color spectrum, and the reverse is true at the other end of the spectrum. As far as
the rods are concerned, a deep red object might as well be black. Thus, if you have
two colored objects—say, one blue and one red—the blue one will appear much
brighter than the red in dim light, although the red one might be much brighter
than the blue one in bright light. The effect is quite intriguing. Try this: In a dark
room, find a magazine or something that has colors, and, before you know for sure
what the colors are, judge the lighter and darker areas. Then bring the magazine
into the light. You should see a remarkable shift between the brightest and dimmest colors.6
The rods and cones in the retina are not connected directly to the optic nerve
but, quite amazingly, are connected to many other cells that are joined to one another. While many of these cells are interconnected, only a few carry information
to the optic nerve. Through these interconnections, a certain amount of information is combined from several visual receptors and “digested” in the retina. In this
way, the light signal is “thought about” before it goes to the optic nerve and thence
to the main body of the brain. So some brain functioning occurs in the eye itself.
The eye does some of our “thinking” for us. This thinking is betrayed by the iris,
the colored part of the eye that expands and contracts and regulates the size of the
pupil, admitting more or less light as the intensity of light changes. It so happens
that the expansion or contraction of the iris is related to our emotions. If we see,
smell, taste, or hear something that is pleasing to us, our pupils automatically increase in size. If we see, smell, taste, or hear something repugnant to us, our pupils
automatically contract. Many card players have betrayed the value of a hand by the
6

This phenomenon is called the Purkinje effect after the Czech physiologist who discovered it.

PROPERTIES OF LIGHT

497

Animals that have 360° vision
without turning their heads include
rabbits and hares because of their
big protruding eyes on the sides of
their heads. But they have depth
perception only where the view
from each eye overlaps a bit in front
of their heads and behind them.

F I G U R E 2 6 .1 9

On the periphery of your vision, you
can see an object only if it is moving;
you cannot see its color at all.

Eyes differ for different creatures.
Mostly cones and only a few rods
are in the retina of a chicken,
which doesn’t see dim light well.
Bees have cones that are sensitive
to ultraviolet light. The giant squid
has the largest eyes in the world.

She loves you...

She loves you not?
FIGURE 26.20

The size of your pupils depends on
your mood.

498

part s i x

Light

size of their pupils! (The study of the size of the pupil as a function of attitudes is
called pupilometrics.)
The brightest light that the human eye can perceive without damage is some
500 million times brighter than the dimmest light that can be perceived. Look
at a nearby lightbulb. Then turn to look into a dimly lit closet. The difference
in light intensity may be more than a million to one. Because of an effect called
lateral inhibition, we don’t perceive the actual differences in brightness. The
brightest places in our visual field are prevented from outshining the rest because whenever a receptor cell on our retina sends a strong brightness signal to
our brain, it also signals neighboring cells to dim their responses. In this way,
we even out our visual field, which allows us to discern detail in very bright
areas and in dark areas as well. (Cameras are not so good at this. A photograph
of a scene with strong differences of intensity may be overexposed in one area
and underexposed in another.) Lateral inhibition exaggerates the difference in
brightness at the edges of places in our visual field. Edges, by definition, separate
one thing from another. So we accentuate differences. The gray rectangle on the
left in Figure 26.21 appears darker than the gray rectangle on the right when
the edge that separates them is in our view. But cover the edge with your pencil
or your finger, and they look equally bright. That’s because both rectangles are
equally bright; each rectangle is shaded lighter to darker, moving from left to
right. Our eye concentrates on the boundary where the dark edge of the left
rectangle joins the light edge of the right rectangle, and our eye–brain system
assumes that the rest of the rectangle is the same. We pay attention to the boundary and ignore the rest.
Questions to ponder: Is the way the eye selects edges and makes assumptions
about what lies beyond similar to the way in which we sometimes make judgments about other cultures and other people? Don’t we, in the same way, tend to
exaggerate the differences on the surface while ignoring the similarities and subtle
differences within?
Figure 26.21

Figure 26.22

Graph of brightness levels for the
rectangle in Figure 26.21.

Brightness

Both rectangles are equally bright.
Cover the boundary between them
with your pencil and see.

C H A P T E R 2 6    P r o p e r t i e s o f L i g h t

Is the slanted line really broken?

Are the dashes on the right really shorter?

Could you make this
in the shop?

Can you count the black dots?

Is the hat taller than
the brim is wide?

Are the vertical
lines parallel?
Figure 26.23

Optical illusions.

What does this
sign read?

Are the rows of tiles really crooked?

