5.5 Summary of Newton’s Three Laws
Newton’s first law, the law of inertia: An object at rest tends to remain at rest; an object in motion tends to remain in motion at constant speed along a straight-line path. This property of objects to resist change in motion is called inertia. Mass is a measure of inertia. Objects will undergo changes in motion only in the presence of a net force.

Newton’s second law, the law of acceleration: When a net force acts on an object, the object will accelerate. The acceleration is directly proportional to the net force and inversely proportional to the mass. Symbolically, a = F/m. Acceleration is always in the direction of the net force. When objects fall in a vacuum, the net force is simply the pull of gravity—and the acceleration is g (the symbol g denotes that acceleration is due to gravity alone). When objects fall in air, the net force is equal to gravity’s pull minus the force of air resistance, and the acceleration is less than g. If and when the force of air resistance equals the gravitational force on a falling object, acceleration terminates, and the object falls at constant speed (called terminal speed).

Newton’s third law, the law of action–reaction: Whenever one object exerts a force on a second object, the second object exerts an equal and opposite force on the first. Forces occur in pairs, one action and the other reaction, which together constitute the interaction between one object and the other. Action and reaction always occur simultaneously and act on different objects. Neither force exists without the other.

Isaac Newton’s three laws of motion are rules of nature that enable us to see how beautifully so many things connect with one another. We see these rules in operation in our everyday environment.

Figure 5.28
Geese fly in a V formation because air pushed downward at the tips of their wings swirls upward, creating an updraft that is strongest off to the side of the bird. A trailing bird gets added lift by positioning itself in this updraft, pushes air downward, and creates another updraft for the next bird, and so on. The result is a flock flying in a V formation.

For instructor-assigned homework, go to www.masteringphysics.com
